CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Honduras.-Comayagua, February 8, 1848.

IN the name of the Eternal Being, the omnipotent Creator, and supreme Legislator of the Universe. The Constituent Assembly of the people of Honduras, assembled for the important object of promoting and guaranteeing its welfare and good government, by securing, upon a solid basis, its sacred rights, and consulting, in its behalf, the lessons of experience, have decreed and sanctioned the following : 

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION of the State of Honduras.

I.-Of the State, its Duties and Obligations.

ART. I. The State of Honduras is composed of all its inhabitants; it is free and independent ; its sovereignty resides essentially in the whole of it taken collectively, and, consequently, the right of establishing organic laws is exclusively its own. II. It is one of the confederate States of Central America, by virtue of its accession freely made to the compact of Nacaome. III. It is its duty to preserve and guarantee by wise and just laws, political and civil liberty, equality before the law, security, property, and the other lawful rights of all and every one of its inhabitants. 

CHAPTER II.-Of the Territory.

IV. The State comprehends all the territory which, during the
Spanish dominion, was known by the appellation of Province, bounded as follows: on the east, south-east, and south, by the State of Nicaragua; on the east, north-east, and north, by the Atlantic Ocean; on the west by Guatemala; on the south, south-east, and west, by Salvador; on the south, by the Bay of Conchagua, the Pacific Ocean, and the isles adjacent to its coasts in both seas. When practicable, the limits which separate it from other States will be accurately defined. V. The division of the territory of the State shall be made by a general law, with the necessary data; and until this is effected, the departments shall remain as they were in the year 1839.

CHAPTER III.-Of Hondurans and Citizens.

VI. Under the appellation of Hondurans, are included all born within the territory of the State ; those born in the other territories of the Republic, but who have taken up their abode in that of Honduras ; naturalized foreigners; and the children born of Honduran parents residing in a foreign country, with a commission from Government, or

for scientific, artistic, literary, or mercantile pursuits, or for a limited term of banishment. VII. Citizens are; all Hondurans above 21 years of age, who are fathers of families, and possessed of the amount of property required by the law, or in default thereof, know how to read and write; and licentiates in any of the higher faculties. VIII. None but citizens in the exercise of their rights are eligible to employment in the State. IX. From the year 1860 no Honduran shall be accounted a citizen unless he can read and write. X. Foreigners become naturalized by acquiring landed property in the State, of the value established by the law, and a residence of 4 years; by contracting marriage with an Honduran woman, and a residence of 2 years; and by obtaining from the legislative body letters of naturalization. XI. Any person born in the Republic of America, and who shall come to settle in Honduras, shall be considered as naturalized from the moment he has signified his intention to that effect, before the respective local authority. XII. Foreigners residing in any part of Honduras are bound to pay all taxes, ordinary and extraordinary, and to discharge all the duties imposed upon natives, while, on the other hand, they are entitled to the same rights as are possessed by natives, viz., of applying to the authorities and of being heard in the courts of justice; and this duty and obligation must be exercised in their favour by the public authorities of the State, at which they first arrive. XIII. The rights of citizenship are suspended by a criminal prosecution involving the punishment of imprisonment, by the commission of a crime deserving of more than a correctional punishment; by being a bankrupt or a fraudulent debtor, legally so declared; by being a public defaulter, and prosecuted as such; by notoriously immoral conduct; by mental incapacity, legally proved; and by being a menial servant. XIV. The qualification of citizen is lost by taking out letters of naturalization in a foreign country ; by accepting employment, salary, or distinctions from any other Government, excepting that of Central America; and by being sentenced to corporal punishment, unless re-habilitated.

CHAPTER IV.-Of the Government and Religion

XV. The Government of the state, whose sole object is the welfare of its inhabitants, shall be republican, popular, and representative; and shall be exercised by 3 distinct powers, the legislative, executive, and judicial. The first shall reside in the representative body, the

second in a President, and the third in the Court of Justice and inferior tribunals. 

XVI. The religion of the state shall be the Christian, Catholic, Apostolic, Roman, the public exercise of every other being prohibited. Its high authorities shall protect it by wise laws; but neither those authorities, nor any other shall interfere in any manner with the private exercise of the other modes of worship which may be established in the country, provided the latter do not tend to injure the dominant one and to disturb public order.

CHAPTER V.- Of the Elections.

XVII. The territory of the state shall be divided into electoral districts, each containing 15,000 souls, which shall choose an acting deputy and his substitute; but until the statistical data shall be collected for making the above-mentioned division, two acting deputies and one substitute shall be elected for each of the departments of Gracias, Comayagua, Tegucigalpa, and Olancho, and one acting deputy and one substitute for Santa Barbara, Choluteca and Yoro. 
XVIII. For each of the departments at present existing, or which shall in future be formed, one acting senator and one substitute shall be elected. XIX. The elections shall be direct, and the law shall regulate the mode of making them, dividing the districts and departments into cantons, and causing registers to be formed of each canton, none but those whose names are entered in such registers being allowed to vote. But for the present the elections shall be made in the same manner as is now practised in the Departments.

CHAPTER VI.- Of the Organization of the Legislative Power. 

XX. The legislative power of the state shall be exercised by 2 Chambers, one of Deputies and the other of Senators, elected in the manner before mentioned. They shall be independent of each other, and shall meet, without the necessity of being convoked, between the 1st and 15th of January every year; their ordinary sittings shall not exceed 40; and extraordinary ones may be held when such are convoked by the Executive, in which case, they shall solely occupy themselves with the matter or matters for which they may be assembled. A lesser number of representatives in each Chamber shall have the power of adopting the necessary means for obtaining the attendance of others until the necessary number be filled up ; and the first legislature shall not be dissolved until all the laws which are to emanate from this Constitution shall have been passed. XXI. Two-thirds of the members of the respective Chambers shall be sufficient for deliberating; but in such case, the votes of two-thirds of the members present in that of Deputies, and of 3 at least in that of the Senate, shall be necessary for a legislative resolution. Until the division spoken of in Article XVII be made, and the number of Deputies therein fixed be maintained, 8 Deputies and 5 Senators shall be sufficient for deliberating; in which case, the votes of 6 Deputies and 3 Senators shall be necessary for each resolution. 

XXII. Both shall open and close their session at the same time, neither of them can suspend or prorogue its sittings for more than 3 (lays without the consent of the other, nor transfer them to another place without the acquiescence of both. XXIII. The Chamber of Deputies shall be renewed every year by In the one-half, the members going out not being re-eligible. Chamber of Senators, 3 of the members shall be renewed by lot every 2 years, and the remainder every 4 years; after which the renewal shall take place in the order of seniority. XXIV. In order to be elected a deputy, it is necessary to be above 25 years of age, and a native, or an inhabitant of the department in which the election takes place, to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship, and to possess an unencumbered estate of at least 500 dollars, or to carry on some profession, office, art, or trade, producing a yearly income equal to that amount. XXV. The qualifications for a Senator are, to be 30 years of age, to be a native or an inhabitant of the department, and to possess an unencumbered estate of not less than 1,000 dollars, or to be a licentiate in some one of the higher faculties. XXVI. The Presidents of the State, who, after having concluded the period or periods of their administration, shall have obtained the testimonial mentioned in Article XLI, shall be honorary members of the Senate.

CHAPTER VII.-Of the Powers common to both Chambers. 
XXVII. Each of the 2 Chambers is competent, without the intervention of the other one. 1. To test the election of its respective members, and approve or not, their credentials. 2. To summon the substitutes, in the event of the death of acting deputies, or of any impediments to their attendance. 3. To accept the resignations made by members for reasons legally recognized. 4. To draw up their internal regulations, and to enforce the responsibility of members by prosecuting them in the name of the Council, or of the citizens, establishing the mode in which they are to be tried, as well for grave offences in the exercise of their duties, as in the case mentioned in the following Article.
XXVIII. No Deputy, nor Senator shall, at any time, be responsible for his opinions, either spoken or written, nor can he be tried either by civil or criminal process, from the day of his election to within 15 days after the legislative body has closed its sittings, except by his respective Chamber, in so far as regards the drawing up and conduct of the case for the purpose of depriving such Deputy or Senator of his seat and consigning him, in consequence thereof, to the competent judge, should the offence be one of those deserving of more than correctional punishment; but any criminal authority can apprehend him for such offences during that period and institute the necessary law proceedings, reporting the same to the Chamber he belongs to, for the objects aforesaid.

CHAPTER VIII.-Of the attributes of the Legislative Power.

XXIX. It is within the competency of the legislative power: 1. To establish jurisdictions, and within them courts of justice, in order that in the name and on behalf of Honduras, they may take cognizance of, try, and pronounce sentence upon every class of crimes, offences, and misdemeanours, law suits, actions, and all civil and criminal matters between citizens, living in, and being inhabitants of, the said state. 2. To interpret the law, assign the duties and jurisdiction of the different functionaries, and decree the civil and criminal codes and proceedings at law for every class of persons and delinquents. 3. To nominate, in General Assembly, the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, and to watch over the due administration of the same. 4. To levy taxes and imposts fairly proportioned upon the inhabitants and upon every description of property and income ; to treat for loans and to procure the same for the other states; to fix and decree annually the troops for active service and the expenses of the public revenue, and to regulate the management and disbursement of the same ; to render in an account of the revenue to the Executive Power; and to examine and acknowledge the public debt, assigning the necessary funds for its extinctions. 5. To raise and organize the army and militia of the state, and decree in case of danger, the war-tax contribution in proportion to the property of each individual and, without exception, on account of any privilege. 6. To direct the public education by decreeing such bases and principles as are calculated for more easily promoting the sciences and useful arts; and to protect the political liberty of the press. 7. To grant honorary rewards and gratuities compatible with the system of established government, for services rendered to the country ; and to fix, increase, or diminish the salaries of functionaries and employes. 8. To decree all the other statutes, ordinances, and regulations which it may deem necessary and advantageous for the support of the constitutional guarantees, the maintenance of the Government, and the interests and welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of Honduras. 9, To regulate the weights and measures, open high roads and canals, decree the armorial bearings and flag of Honduras, and determine the alloy, weight, pattern, and denomination of the coinage. 10. To declare war and make peace upon the information and preliminaries communicated to it by the Executive, and to ratify the Treaties and Conventions entered into by the said Executive. 11. To grant pardons and general amnesties. 12. To accept in General Assembly, resignations which may be tendered, for important reasons, by the President and Vice-President of the State, the magistrates of the Supreme Court, and Counsellors of State. 13. To declare, in General Assembly, that sufficient cause exists for prosecuting the President, the Vice-President, the magistrates of the courts of justice, the Ministers of State, and counsellors, upon well-founded charges brought against them by citizens or the council. 14. In no case, and under no pretence whatsoever can the General Assembly grant extraordinary powers to the Executive, nor enlarge those which have been particularized in this Constitution. 

CHAPTER IX-Of the formation of the Laws, and of their sanction. 

XXX. Projects of law can be initiated in the Chamber of Deputies only, and must be proposed by the representatives, tie senators, and the Secretaries of State, in the name of the Executive ; but no projects of law upon taxes or imposts, of any kind whatsoever, can be introduced by the said Secretaries of State. 
XXXI. Every project of law, after having been discussed and approved by the Chamber of Deputies, shall be passed to that of the Senate for discussion and approval, if judged expedient ; and, should the Senate approve the same, it shall then be passed to the Executive, who, in the event of there being objections to offer, shall approve of it, and cause it to be published as law. 
XXXII. If the Chamber of Senators upon examining the project should amend and modify it, it shall be returned to the Chamber of Deputies, in order that, together with the amendments and additions made thereto, it may be again discussed; if then approved it shall again be sent to the Senate, by whom it shall be submitted to the Executive, in order that he shall carry into effect the provisions laid down in the preceding Article. 
XXXIII. Should the Executive find objections to giving his sanction to the projects of law, he shall return them to the Senate, within 10 days, in order that the latter may pass them to the Chamber of Deputies, the reasons for his opinion in the negative being assigned; and if within the prescribed term no objection should be made, the projects shall be considered as sanctioned and be published as laws. In the case of the project of law being returned, the Chamber of Deputies may reconsider and ratify it by two-thirds of the votes of the members present, and again send it to the Senate for its approval, if the latter should deem fit: in which case it shall be sent up to the Executive, who shall consider it as law, and as such, shall order it to be published and carried into execution. 
XXXIV. Any project of law thrown out, and not ratified, cannot be again proposed during the same session, but must be deferred to that of the ensuing year. When ratified, the voting shall be by name, and must be entered in the minutes of the proceedings of the Chamber. XXXV. Every project of law approved of in the Chamber of Deputies, shall be drawn up in triplicate, be published in that Chamber, and the copies having been signed by the president and secretaries thereof, it shall be passed to the Senate. Should the latter also approve it, the project shall be signed in the same manner by its president and secretary, and then passed to the Executive, with this formula: "To the Executive Power." Should the latter disapprove, he shall return the copies, using this formula: "Returned to the Chamber of Deputies," the said formula appearing on one of the copies only. The formula to be employed by this Chamber for directing its projects to the Senate, shall be: "Let it be passed to the Senate." 
XXXVI. The Executive having received a project of law, shall, if there be no objections to make, sign 3 copies, returning one to the Senate, in order that it may be deposited in the archives of that body; another to the Chamber of Deputies, to be placed in their archives; and the third to be kept in the archives of the Ministry of State, to be published as law. 

XXXVII. The promulgation of the law shall be made in this form: "Inasmuch as the Chamber of Deputies has decreed, and that of the Senators has approved, the following (here the text), so let it be executed."

CHAPTER X.-Of the Executive Power, and of the Ministers of State.

XXXVIII. The Executive power shall be exercised by a President of the State, who shall be nominated, directly, by the citizens of Honduras; but in the case of his not being elected by an absolute majority of votes, the Chambers united in General Assembly shall elect him from among the 2 or more who have obtained the greatest

number of votes; and if one person only should have obtained that majority, the election shall then be made between him and the individual who is immediately next to him in the number of votes.

XXXIX. The qualifications for a President are: to be above 32 years of age; to be a layman and a native of the Confederation of Central America, with a residence of 5 years in Honduras; to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; to possess a capital of not less than 5,000 dollars in landed and independent property, and to be of good moral character. 

XL. In order to supply the absence of the President, the General Assembly shall elect a Vice-President from among those who after him shall have obtained the greatest number of votes; and should this not be effected in time, the office of the Executive shall, in the interim, be exercised by the Senator who stands next in the order of votes. 
XLI. The duration of the offices of President and Vice-President shall be for 4 years, and they are re-eligible once, without the interval of that period, should they be again chosen by the people; but that this may be the case, it is necessary that the General Assembly shall have previously declared them " Good servants of the State" for making, or declaring the election so soon as it meets. This proviso shall also be necessary to enable those who have formerly exercised the Executive of the State to fill the same offices. 
XLII. The period for the continuance in office of the President and Vice-President shall begin and end on the 1st of February, and he cannot remain in office a single day longer. 
XLIII. The requisites for being a Minister of State are: to be above 25 years of age ; to be in the exercise of the rights of citizenship; to be a man of information; of moral conduct; a citizen of the State, and to possess a capital of not less than 1,000 dollars. 
XLIV. The President shall, when he thinks fit, appoint 1 or 2 ministers, and shall assign the department over which each of them shall have the control; he shall have the power of suspending them when he has a just cause for doing so, giving information thereof to the next Assembly in order that it may declare whether there are grounds for a prosecution, in which case a substitute ad interim may be appointed. 
XLV. All the orders of the Executive shall be issued through the Minister: those which are issued through any other channel may neither be obeyed nor fulfilled. Those whose duty it is to execute orders shall be responsible for such as they authorize and carry into effect, contrary to the constitution and the laws.

CHAPTER XI.-Of the attributes of the Executive Power. 

XLVI. The principal duty and obligation of the Executive is: 1. To preserve the internal peace and tranquillity of the State, in accordance with the laws. 2. To promulgate the laws, and cause them to be executed and fulfilled. 3. To propose to the Chamber of Deputies, through the medium of the Minister, the projects of law which he may consider useful and conducive to the welfare of the Hondurans, excepting always the restriction mentioned in Art. XXX. 4. To fill up all the civil, political, military, judicial, and financial offices, as well as such others as the laws may require. 5. To convoke an extraordinary meeting of the legislative body, the council having been previously heard, whenever the state is threatened with invasion, or the public tranquillity is seriously disturbed, or upon any other unforeseen occasion in which its assembling may be necessary, in order to guard or protect the independence and integrity of the territory, or its international rights ; on such occasions the substitutes of such deputies and senators who. have died during the recess shall be summoned. 6. In the event above anticipated, as well as in that of pestilence or famine, if there should not be sufficient time to call together and assemble the legislative body, the Executive may, having first heard the council, decree loans or general contributions, in a just proportion to the property of each citizen, but never upon particular persons giving afterwards an exact account of the use made of this power. 7. To fix the place of meeting of the legislative body when that already assigned it shall be afflicted with an epidemic, or be threatened with any other imminent danger, in consequence of which it cannot deliberate in freedom or security. 8. To present to the General Assembly, by means of the Ministry, 5 days after the opening of the ordinary session, a detailed and circumstantial account of all the branches of the public administration, with the propositions which it considers necessary for its preservation, reform, or amelioration; as also an exact account of the past financial year, and an estimate of the expenses of the next, together with the means of covering them; and if, within the said term, such account and such estimate shall not be furnished, the general Minister, or the Minister of Finance, should there be one, shall be suspended from his functions. 9. To make war and conclude Treaties of Peace, and any other negotiations, submitting the same for the ratification of the Legislative body. 10. To direct and dispose of the armed force for the purpose of executing the laws and maintaining public order; to discharge the

office of commander-in-chief, and to command, in person, the army, with the consent and approval of the legislative body; in which case, the Executive office shall be administered by the Vice-President. 11. To raise the forces necessary beyond those decreed by the law, in order to repel invasions or suppress insurrections, giving an account of the same to the legislative power at its next meeting. 12. To commute punishments. 13. To supersede, at will, the commanders of troops. 14. To remove, after hearing the council, all the functionaries and employees appointed by the executive, and suspend them pro tempore, without any salary, for the space of 6 months, in consequence of incapacity, disobedience, serious offences in the exercise of their duties, or malversation. The judges of the First Instance are excepted in the use of this power. The resignations shall be admitted in the case of the former as well as the latter functionaries. 15. To allow retirement and leave of absence to the employees and functionaries in the cases provided by the law.* 16. To furnish the Chambers with such information as they may need; and should such information relate to matters which require secrecy, to make a representation to that effect, in order to be dispensed from furnishing the same, or that the Chambers, if they think it necessary, may demand it; but it is not obliged to disclose the plans of' military operations, or the negotiations of high policy, except in the case of such information being necessary in order to enforce the responsibility of the parties, in which case, the information may on no account be withheld, nor the documents kept back after an accusation has been brought before the General Assembly. 17. To issue regulations and ordinances for the purpose of facilitating and insuring the execution of the laws, the proper administration of the public revenue, and its lawful expenditure. 18. To enter into colonization contracts, laying the same for approval before the legislative body, without which requisite they cannot be carried into effect. 19. To order, upon receiving information that a subaltern authority has transgressed the limits of its powers by the infringement of some law, that such functionary be suspended, and an investigation be made into the matter; and should the representation prove true, the authority so offending shall be forthwith dismissed, but in case he is not, the Executive itself shall be held responsible. 20. To inspect, in accordance with the laws and statutes at present existing, the public establishments of sciences and arts, the prisons and galleys, connected with the police and public order; and to draw up the statistics of the same.
 
CHAPTER XII.-Of the Council of State. 
XLVII. The Council of State shall be composed of 1 senator, elected by the General Assembly; of a magistrate of the court, named by the section in which the government is; of the Minister or Ministers of State; of the Director of the Public Revenue ; of the First Accountant General; and of those employ6s (not exceeding 2), distinguished for their information or services, who may be appointed by the General Assembly. 
XLVIII. In like manner, the Council, with the approval of the Executive, may nominate as honorary counsellors, such deserving employees or citizens as are distinguished by their integrity, information, and services. 
XLIX. The Council is competent: 1. To give advice to the Executive when any doubt arises as to the execution of the laws, and their sanction and its opinion is asked, about the employment of the armed force ; the granting, refusing, or asking aid; the incurring any extraordinary expenses; decreeing loans or contributions ; and in all cases in which the Executive is desirous of having such advice ; 2. To receive the accusations brought by citizens against the high powers of the State, and to report them to the General Assembly, at its next ordinary meeting. The Council shall also act as accusers in all cases in which the conduct of such parties has been notoriously contrary to the welfare of society, and for treason, venality, bribery, or subornation, and for any serious offence in the exercise of their functions, as well as for common crimes liable to-more than correctional punishment. These latter, as well as the former delinquencies, being actionable at common law; 3. To declare, the Executive having been heard, when legal proceedings are necessary to be taken against the Second Accountant-General, the Ministers of General Direction and of the Customs, Political Chiefs, Intendants, Commanders of sections, harbours, and frontiers, Generals and Colonels, for crimes committed in the exercise of their duties, who are all to be tried for these and other offences which they may commit, before the common tribunals; 4. To lay down rules for its own internal regulation, and to submit them for the approbation of the General Assembly. L. The accusations brought against the Council for the offences mentioned in paragraph 2 of the preceding Article, may be presented by the citizens to the Executive, who shall lay them before the Legislative power at its next ordinary meeting ; or the said citizens may transmit the same to the latter, direct.

CHAPTER XIII.-Of the Judicial Power


Li. The judicial power is independent in its attributes; and to it exclusively belongs the application of the law in civil and criminal causes; it shall essentially reside in a supreme court of justice, divided into 2 sections, each one being composed of 3 magistrates and 2 substitutes, to be chosen by the General Assembly, and located, one in the capital of the State, and the other in the city of Tegucigalpa. The individuals nominated for this office shall be lawyers of credit and integrity, who have completed their 25th year, or persons of above 30 years of age, possessing an unencumbered capital of not less than 1,000 dollars, and more than ordinary attainments in jurisprudence; they must also be fathers of a family, citizens in the exercise of their rights, and inhabitants of the State. They shall be irremovable from office during their good behaviour; but should they apply for their dismission, it may be granted them after the expiration of 2 years from the time of their entering upon their duties. 
LII. Each section of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be a tribunal of Second Instance, within the territorial limits assigned by the law, and of Third Instance in the causes heard by the other in appeal. 
LIII. The laws shall determine the powers belonging to the sectional courts, whether with respect to those matters which come under their cognizance as Courts of Second or Third Instance, or as a plenary Court. 
LIV. The sections shall propose to the Executive the persons to be nominated Judges of First Instance, and they shall unremittingly watch over the speedy and full administration of justice within their respective limits; settling, at the same time, any contentions which may arise between any of the tribunals and courts. 
LV. They shall order the execution of all public documents, and certify to the judicial acts done in the other States, of whatsoever import and nature they may be; provided always, that the said acts be conformable to the laws of the State whence they emanate. 
LVI. They may suspend, during the recess of the Legislative Body, the Members of their Tribunal as well as the Judges of First Instance, and Assessors, at all times when any of them shall have committed grave offences in the exercise of their functions; which duty they must perform without receiving any salary for the same, and upon summary information of the fact.

CHAPTER XIV.-Of the Inferior Judges.

LVII. The law shall establish Judges of the First Instance for taking cognizance of all civil and criminal matters: it shall also assign

the jurisdiction of each one, and the remuneration proportioned to its labours. 
LVIII. For being a Judge of First Instance, it is required to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights ; to be above the age of 25 ; to be a man of education, or to possess attainments in jurisprudence, and to have a capital of not less than 500 dollars ; to be the father of a family, and of known integrity. For giving their judgments, they will consult the assessors, who are appointed for that purpose. The law shall determine their powers. Both judges and assessors are irremovable during their good conduct, and they may resign their employment, at the expiration of 2 years from their entering upon it. 

CHAPTER XV.-Of the Administration of Justice in Criminal Cases. 
LIX. No person can be arrested, unless by virtue of a warrant written by an authority competent to issue it. LX. Such warrant cannot be issued, unless previous proof be given that a crime has been committed deserving of more than correctional punishment, and unless it appear, by the attestation of at least one witness, who the delinquent is. LXI. The detention is allowable of the delinquent whose evasion there is good reason to apprehend; and also of the person found in the actual commission of an offence, in which case any person may apprehend him for the purpose of his being brought before the judge. LXII. The detention spoken of in the preceding Article must not extend beyond 48 hours, and during that interval the authority by which it has been ordered must carry into effect what has been provided in Article LIX, and either issue an order for imprisonment, or set the detained party at liberty. LXIII. Every accused person shall be examined within 48 hours, and the judge must either decree his being set at liberty, or remand him to prison within the following 24 hours, according to the merits of the case. LXIV. Within those 24 hours the accused must be informed of the cause of his imprisonment, and the name of his accuser, who shall be obliged to prove his charge against the party. LXV. Persons arrested by legal authority cannot be taken to any other place of imprisonment, detention, or arrest, than those which are legally and publicly appointed for such purpose. 
LXVI. Whosoever, not being authorized by the law, shall issue, sign, execute, or cause to be executed the imprisonment, detention, or arrest of any person; whosoever, in ease of imprisonment, detention, or arrest authorized by the law, shall conduct, receive, or detain the accused in any place, not being one of those publicly and legally appointed, and every Alcalde who shall contravene the preceding provisions of this Chapter, shall be guilty of arbitrary detention.

LXVII. No accused can be prevented from having communication with other persons, unless an order of the judge to that effect be entered upon the Alcalde's register. 

LXVIII. No person able to give bail, in the cases not prohibited by law, can be arrested or detained in prison. LXIX. The arrest, imprisonment, or confinement for correctional punishment cannot exceed 30 days, nor a fine of 25 dollars. LXX. The punishment of death cannot be imposed in any case whatsoever, however grave, criminal, or atrocious it may appear, except against those who have caused it to be inflicted on one or more persons; nor can any approval of the act, let the authority be who it may, be adduced as a justification thereof; nor can any lapse of time, however great, be alleged in extenuation. LXXI. The legislative body shall give directions that visits of inspection be made to the prisons, on behalf of every class of persons apprehended, detained, or arrested. LXXII. The judges are personally responsible for any non-observance by them of the rules regulating the law proceedings in criminal as well as in civil cases. For the same crime there cannot be 2 trials. LXXIII. Punishments must be proportioned to the nature and gravity of the crime; its true object is to correct, and not exterminate men. Hence, all constraint or torture which is unnecessary to preserve personal security, is atrocious and cruel, and as such must not be allowed. LXXIV. No individual can be required to give evidence in criminal cases against himself, nor against his relations within the 4th degree of consanguinity and the 2nd of affinity; and in every criminal prosecution the accused shall have the right of producing all the evidence that may be favourable to him, of being confronted with the witnesses, when he requires it; and of conducting his defence either in person, or by means of his advocate or defender. LXXV. No civil case or action for damages can be entered for trial, unless proof be previously given of conciliatory means having been first resorted to. 

CHATER XVI.- Of the responsibility of the Supreme Authorities, and of the Mode of Procedure with respect thereto. 
LXXVI. Every functionary or employe, upon entering office, shall take an oath to be faithful to the State, to fulfil and cause to be fulfilled the constitution and the laws, and to adhere thereto, notwithstanding any orders or resolutions to the contrary; and he shall be responsible, with his person and property, for any infringement committed by him, for a period equal to the time he may have been in office.

LXXVII. Whenever the Council, by a majority of votes, and acting, in virtue of its first attribute, shall accuse any of the High Powers, or shall lay before the General Assembly the accusations brought by the citizens, or whenever the latter shall bring the same direct to that assembly, the bill of indictment, if there be reasonable grounds for it, together with the proceedings consequent upon it, shall be examined in the Assembly by 5 of its members chosen by lot; but the decision shall be made collectively, two-thirds of the votes of the members present being necessary for authorizing the delivery of the sentence. In like manner shall counsellors be tried when accused by the citizens. Deputies and senators shall be tried by their own Chamber, the only difference in the mode of procedure being, that in the chamber of the former, 2 deputies shall draw up the bill of indictment, and in that of the senators, a member who shall be nominated by them for that purpose. 
LXXVIII. The sentences of the General Assembly and those of the Chambers, shall be restricted to depriving the accused of his seat and to declaring him incapable of obtaining any honorary, lucrative, or confidential post, either for a definite term or for perpetuity; but should the case require it, the guilty party shall remain subject to the consequences of an ordinary prosecution before the common tribunals. LXXIX. From the time that a true bill has been found against the accused in the General Assembly, he remains suspended from the exercise of his official functions, nor can he, on any account whatsoever, continue in his post without making himself responsible for the crime of usurpation, nor may any individual obey him. LXXX. The decrees, acts, and sentences pronounced in the General Assembly, or in the Chamber, shall be fulfilled and executed without the necessity of any confirmation or sanction whatsoever. 

CHAPTER XVII.-Of the Public Treasure. 
LXXXI. The public treasure of the State consists in all the movable property, landed estates, and debts due to it ; all the imposts, contributions, dues, and taxes paid by Hondurans, or which they shall hereafter pay for their persons, trade, property, and commerce; and all the duties paid by commerce conformably to the laws. LXXXII. At the commencement of the sessions there shall be annually published an account of the receipts and expenditure of the public treasure; and the Executive shall order the periodical publication of a statement of the incomes and outgoings of all branches of the revenue. LXXXIII. There shall be in Honduras a Director-General of the public revenue, and in the departments, Intendants; the latter only

receiving a percentage : the law shall assign the duties and qualifications of the said Intendants and of the Director, and shall appoint the other employees whose duty it shall be to draw up, classify, and explain the said accounts.

CHAPTER XVIII.-Of the Political Government of the Departments, and of the Municipal Administration. 

LXXXIV. In each one of the departments there shall be a Political Chief named by the Executive. These officers must be men of integrity and information, possessed of an unencumbered capital of not less than 500 dollars, inhabitants of the respective department, and above 25 years of age. 

LXXXV. The offices of Political Chief and of Intendant cannot be filled by the same person, and military command can be superadded to the former only in time of war, when the Executive shall consider it necessary. 
LXXXVI. The Political Chiefs shall be the organs of communication between the Executive Power and the Town authorities, as well as the principal agents of Government in the execution of the laws, and for the external and internal security of each department; but they may never interfere in the judicial branch. They shall remain 4 years in office and may be re-elected. The law will assign their duties and the mode of executing them. 

LXXXVII. There shall be municipalities in all the chief parochial towns, and other towns containing 500 inhabitants either altogether or within their boundaries. It is indispensable that the Alcades should know how to read and write. A particular law will complete the arrangements of the municipal system. LXXXVIII. The towns which cannot be governed by municipal Alcades for want either of duly qualified citizens, according to the preceding Article, or of a sufficient population, shall have ordinary Alcades, without jurisdiction, who, in all political matters, shall put themselves in immediate communication with the Departmental Judge, and in judicial matters, with the Judge of the First Instance.

CHAPTER XIX.-Of the manner in which this Constitution is to be

reformed. 

LXXXIX. None of its articles can be reformed or have additions made thereto before 6 years have elapsed. But if the Treaties decreed by the Diet of Nacaome be approved by the States of Nicaragua and Salvador, and if the National Constituent Assembly called together in consequence, decrees the constitution by which the Confederation is to be governed, the ordinary Legislature shall convoke a Constituent Assembly, for the purpose of accepting and, at the same time, modifying the present Constitution in that part only which may be at variance with the former one.

XC. After the stated period has elapsed, partial reform or super-addition shall be proceeded with, should the same be proposed by one-fourth part of the members of the General Assembly, and agreed upon by the latter, with two-thirds of the votes of the Deputies, with the approbation of the Senate and with the sanction of the Executive. And, thereupon, should public opinion require a total reform, if proposed and accepted in the proper manner, a Constituent Assembly shall be convoked to decree the same. XCI. Partial reforms respecting guarantees can never be allowed, unless it be to extend existing ones; nor can any change be introduced in the division of powers.

CHAPTER XX.-Declaration of the Rights, Duties, and Guarantees of the People, and of Hondurans in particular.

XCII. The sovereignty is inalienable and imprescriptible, and limited to what is honourable, useful, and advantageous to society: no fraction of the people or of individuals can arrogate it to themselves; and the exercise of it is originally circumscribed to effecting the elections as directed by law. XCIII. All political power emanates from the people ; the public functionaries are its delegates and agents, nor do they possess any other powers than those expressly assigned to them by the law. By the law they order and govern; on its account obedience and respect is due to them ; and, in conformity therewith, they must render an account of their acts. XCIV. All the inhabitants of the state possess incontestable rights for preserving their life and liberty, for acquiring, possessing, and disposing of their property, and for procuring their happiness, provided it be without injury to a third person. They are obliged to obey the laws, respect the established authorities, to contribute, in proportion to their means, to the public expenses, and to serve and defend their country with their arms, even at the cost of life itself, when called upon so to do by the law. XCV. The supreme power is attainable by constitutional means only; if any one usurps it by forcible means or popular sedition, he is guilty of the crime of usurpation: all that he does shall be null and void, and things shall return to their former state, as soon as constitutional order shall be re-established. XCVI. Every resolution, decree, order, ordinance, or sentence of the constitutional powers, which is the effect of compulsion by military force, or by the people in insurrection, is null and void. XCVII. No armed body can make requisitions nor exact any description of aid, except through the medium of the civil authorities, and by a formal order from the same. XCVIII. The armed force is essentially obedient; it cannot deliberate, and no individual belonging to it, in active service, can be elected a Deputy, Senator, or President. XCIX. Every citizen and inhabitant may freely express, write, and publish his opinion, without any previous censorship, and with the sole obligation of being responsible for the abuse of that liberty before the tribunal which the law shall establish. Hondurans may also peaceably and orderly assemble together for the purpose of discussing questions of public interest, or for addressing petitions to the constituted authorities; but the originators of such assemblies shall be personally responsible for any excesses which maybe committed. C. Private actions which do not directly offend public order, nor produce injury to a third party, are not within the competency of the law. CI. No Honduran can be disturbed, molested, or persecuted for his opinions, of whatsoever description they may be, provided that be does not, by a positive and direct act, disturb the public peace or violate the law. CII. All laws, orders, provisions, or decrees, which are retroactive, proscriptive, confiscatory, condemnatory without trial, or which transmit infamy to descendants, are unjust, oppressive, and null. The authorities or the private individuals who commit such violations of justice shall be at all times liable, in their persons and property, to make reparation for damage incurred. CIII. Every Honduran has the right to be protected from inquisition, search, and constraint, in his person, his house, his papers, family, and property. The law shall point out the manner of visiting suspected places, searching houses in order to obtain proofs of crime, and apprehend delinquents, with the view of their being brought to justice; and no individual shall be tried in any other jurisdiction than that in which the crime was committed. CIV. In no case, and under no circumstances, shall Hondurans be tried by military tribunals or courts-martial, nor be subjected to the pains and punishments provided by the Articles of War, excepting the navy and the militia on active service. CV. Those tribunals only which have been previously established by the law shall try and have cognizance of civil and criminal cases affecting Hondurans. Should the legislative body, with the exceptions pointed out, or the Executive power or the Council do this, either by assuming powers which do not belong to them, or by declaring to be a delinquent, and punishing as such, an individual who ought to be tried by his own natural judges; it is declared that such powers attack the present charter, and that for such infraction thereof, they are responsible, at any time, with their persons and property. CVI. Causes, of whatsoever kind they maybe, shall be finally decided within the territory of Honduras; they cannot pass through more than 3 Instances, and no inhabitant can withdraw himself, for any cause whatever, from the cognizance of the authority appointed by the law. CVII. Every citizen or inhabitant, free from responsibilities, may emigrate whither he thinks fit, and can return whenever it is convenient to him. CVIII. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable; intercepted letters shall be no evidence either in a court of justice or otherwise. Postmasters, or any other individual or authority, who violates it, and the judge who admits it as evidence, are personally responsible for the violation of this guarantee. CIX. The direction of the police of security can only be entrusted to the civil authorities, in the form which may be established by the law. CX. The power of appointing arbitrators in any stage of a civil action is within the competency of every person, and the decision pronounced by them shall be without appeal, unless the parties have expressly reserved to themselves that right. CXI. The same judges cannot sit in 2 different Instances; remove causes from inferior to higher courts in order to try them; nor re-open suits already terminated. CXII. Property, of any description whatever, cannot be taken possession of, except for objects of public utility, legally proved, and without the owner having been previously indemnified for its value at a fair valuation. CXIII. Neither the legislative power, nor the Executive, nor any tribunal or authority, can restrict, alter, or infringe any of the proclaimed guarantees; and any power or authority which shall violate them, shall be held individually responsible for the injury caused, as announced in Article CI1, and be considered as a usurper. CXIV. The Constitution of the State of January 11, 1839, is abolished, and the laws which are not in opposition to the present one, are still in force. 

Given in Comayagua, February 4, 1848. 
[Here follow the signatures of 17 Deputies.] 
Let it be executed. This shall be the warrant for the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who shall cause the same to be printed, published, and circulated. Given in the city of Comayagua, in the Government House, and countersigned by the undersigned, Minister of Foreign Affairs, on the 5th February, 1848. SANTOS GUARDIOLA. JUAN LINDO.