THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COMMUNIST WORLD
Edited by

WILLIAM B. SIMONS

SIJTHOFF & NOORDHOFF 1980 Alphen aan den Rijn The Netherlands Germantown, Maryland U.S.A.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 80-65005 ISBN 90 286 0070 1 Copyright © 1980 Sijthoff & Noordhoff International Publishers B.V., Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Printed in The Netherlands.

CONSTITUTION OF THE HUNGARIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
Magyar Kozlony 1949, pp. 1355-1362 (as amended). Consolidated text in Magyar Kozlony 1972 No. 32, and subsequent amendment in Magyar Kozlony 1975 No. 23.

Hungary was preserved and supported for more than a millennium by the work and sacrifice of her people and their strength in molding society. State power, at the same time, was the tool of the ruling classes in suppressing and exploiting people deprived of their rights. Our nation pursued a difficult struggle for social progress and national independence; it defended and preserved our national existence amidst countless tribulations. A new era of our history commenced when the Soviet Union, in the course of its victory in World War II, liberated our country from fascist oppression and opened the way toward democratic development for the Hungarian people. The working people, with the friendly assistance of the Soviet Union, reconstructed the war-torn country which was lying in ruins. The Hungarian workers' class—in alliance with the working peasantry and in cooperation with the progressive intellectuals—achieved and strengthened the power of the working people in the fight against the lords and protectors of the old regime. With the leadership of the working class hardened in the revolutionary struggles, enriched with the experiences of the Soviet Republic of 1919, and supported by the community of socialist countries, our nation laid the foundations of socialism. The socialist conditions of production became predominant in our country. In place of the old, a new country was born in which state power serves the interests of the people and the unfolding of the productive forces and the welfare of the citizens. The Hungarian people, in close national unity, are working on completing the building of socialism. The Constitution of the Hungarian People's Republic is the expression of the basic changes carried out in the life of our country, of the historic results of the struggle for social progress, and of the efforts to build a new country.

The Constitution, as the basic law of the Hungarian People's Republic, guarantees our achievements and further progress toward socialism.

Chapter I. The Social Order of the Hungarian People's Republic Article 1. Hungary is a People's Republic. Article 2. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic is a socialist state. (2) All power in the Hungarian People's Republic belongs to the working people. (3) The leading class of society in the Hungarian People's Republic is the working class, which exercises its power in alliance with the peasantry united in the cooperatives and with the intellectuals and other working strata of society. (4) The workers of the cities and the country exercise their power through their elected representatives, who are responsible to the people. (5) The citizens participate directly in the administration of public affairs at their place of work and residence. Article 3. The leading force of society is the Marxist-Leninist party of the working class. Article 4. (I) The Hungarian People's Republic shall assure the participation of social organizations in the constructive work of socialism. (2) The Patriotic People's Front shall organize the forces of society to complete the building of socialism and to solve political, economic, and cultural problems; it shall cooperate in the election and work of the representative organs of the state. (3) The trade unions shall protect and strengthen the power of the people and shall protect and represent the interests of the workers. Article 5. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall protect the freedom and power of the working people and the independence of the country, shall fight against any form of exploitation of the people by the people, and shall organize the forces of society to complete the building of socialism. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic, as a part of the socialist world organization, shall develop and strengthen its friendship with

the socialist countries; it shall strive to cooperate with all nations and countries of the world in the interests of peace and human progress. Article 6. (1) With the elimination of the exploiting classes, the socialist conditions of production became preponderant in the Hungarian People's Republic. The basis of the economic order is the social ownership of the means of production. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall support and protect all forms of social ownership. Article 7. The national economic plan shall determine the economic life of the Hungarian People's Republic. The state shall direct and supervise the people's economy supported by enterprises, cooperatives, and institutions in social ownership, in the interest of the development of productive forces, the increase of socialist property, the systematic raising of the economic and cultural standards of the citizens, and the increase of the defensive strength of the country. Article 8. (1) State property forms the assets of the entire nation. (2) The following shall be, above all, in state ownership: the deposits within the bowels of the earth, the land holdings of the state, natural resources, significant plants and mines, railroads, public roads, waterways and airways, banks, the post, telegraph, telephone, radio, and television. (3) A special law shall determine the scope of state ownership, as well as the scope of the exclusive economic activities of the state. Article 9. Government enterprises and economic agencies shall independently manage the assets entrusted to them in the manner and under the responsibility established by law in the service of the general interests of society. Article 10. (1) Cooperatives shall be a part of the socialist order of society; they shall serve the interests of their membership in concurrence with the social and economic goals of the socialist state. (2) The state shall support the cooperative movement of the workers based on voluntary association, the development of socialist cooperative ownership; it shall assure the independence of cooperatives, and it shall exercise supervision of their activities in the interest of implementing socialist cooperative principles. (3) The Hungarian People's Republic shall take special care of the agricultural production cooperatives of the peasantry. It shall protect and support the socialist cooperative ownership of the land.

Article 11. The Hungarian People's Republic shall recognize and protect personal property. Article 12. The state shall recognize the economic activities of small-scale producers of commodities which are useful to society. Private ownership and private initiative, however, may not violate public interests. Article 13. The Constitution shall guarantee the right of inheritance. Article 14. (1) Labor shall be the foundation of the social order of the Hungarian People's Republic. (2) It shall be the right and duty of every able-bodied citizen to work according to his ability. (3) Citizens shall serve the cause of socialist construction by their labor, their participation in socialist competition, by increasing labor discipline, and improving working methods. (4) The Hungarian People's Republic shall strive for the consistent realization of the socialist principle: "From each according to his ability, to each according to his work." Article 15. The Hungarian People's Republic shall protect the institutions of marriage and the family. Article 16. The Hungarian People's Republic shall take special care of the development and socialist education of the youth; it shall protect the interests of youth. Article 17. The Hungarian People's Republic shall protect the life, physical safety, and health of citizens, and shall assist them in the event of sickness, disability, or old age. Article 18. The Hungarian People's Republic shall organize and support scientific work that promotes the development of society, assist the arts serving progress, and assure the steady increase of citizens' education and culture.

Chapter II. The Parliament of the Hungarian People's Republic and the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic The Parliament Article 19. (1) Parliament shall be the highest representative organ of state power in the Hungarian People's Republic. (2) Parliament shall exercise all the rights deriving from the sovereignty of the people, shall assure the constitutional order of society, and shall determine the organization, direction, and conditions of government. (3) Parliament within this jurisdiction shall: a) write the Constitution of the Hungarian People's Republic; b) enact laws; c) establish the national economic plan; d) determine the state budget and approve its implementation; e) discuss and approve the program of the government; f) ratify international agreements in the name of the Hungarian People's Republic; g) decide on the problems of declaring a state of war and a conclusion of peace; h) elect the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic; i) elect the Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People's Republic; j) create ministries; k) elect the President of the Supreme Court of the Hungarian People's Republic and the Chief Prosecutor of the Hungarian People's Republic; 1) supervise compliance with the Constitution; annul any actions of government agencies which are in conflict with the Constitution, or violate the interests of society. Article 20. (1) Parliament shall be elected for a term of five years. (2) Members of Parliament shall carry out their activities in the interest of their constituents, the public. (3) Members of Parliament shall regularly give an account of their activities to their constituents. (4) Members of Parliament shall not be arrested, nor may criminal proceedings be instituted against them without the consent of Parliament, unless they were apprehended in the act of committing a crime. (5) All political, economic, or other activities and conduct that are

detrimental to the interests of society shall be incompatible with the mandate of a Member of Parliament. Article 21. (1) Parliament shall elect a speaker, deputy speakers, and recorders from among its members. (2) Parliament shall create standing committees from among its members and may appoint a committee to investigate any matter. (3) It shall be the duty of administrative authorities, offices, and institutions, as well as of the citizens of the country, to furnish any data requested by parliamentary committees or to testify before committees. Article 22. (1) Parliament shall convene in regular session at least twice a year. (2) Parliament shall be convoked by virtue of a resolution of the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic or upon the written request of one-third of its members. (3) The Presidium shall take care of the convocation of Parliament. Article 23. Sessions of Parliament, as a rule, shall be open to the public. In exceptional cases, Parliament may decide to sit in closed session. Article 24. (1) The presence of at least one-half of the members shall be required for a quorum of Parliament. (2) Parliament shall pass on resolutions by a simple majority of votes. (3) The vote of two-thirds of all the Members of Parliament shall be required to amend the Constitution. (4) Parliament shall establish the rules for its activity and the course of debate in the Rules of Order. Article 25. (1) The Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic, the Council of Ministers, every committee of Parliament, or any Member of Parliament shall have the right to introduce bills. (2) The legislative power shall be vested in Parliament. Article 26. A law adopted by Parliament shall be signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic. The Chairman of the Presidium shall be in charge of the promulgation of a law. A law shall be promulgated in the official gazette.

Article 27.

Members of. Parliament may ask questions of the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic, as well as of the Council of Ministers, or any member thereof, the secretaries of state, the President of the Supreme Court, and the Chief Prosecutor in regard to matters within their respective jurisdictions. Whoever is asked ,.a question shall, give his answer in Parliament.
Article '28. (1)

Parliament may resolve its dissolution even before the expiration of its term. (2) parliament, in case of war or other extraordinary cirumstaneyolvhprngatifsemordnit period of time. (3) In the event of war or other extraordinary circumstances, an already dissolved Parliament may be recalled by the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic. Parliament recalled in such a manner shall itself decide upon the prolongation of its mandate. (4) A new Parliament shall be elected within three months after the expiration of the term, or the dissolution of Parliament. (5) The Presidium shall convoke the newly-elected Parliament within one month after its election. The Presidium During its first session, Parliament shall elect from among its own members the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic, [consisting of] the Chairman of the Presidium, two Deputy Chairmen, the Secretary, and 17 members. (2) The Chairman, Deputy Chairmen, and members of the Council of Ministers, as well as the secretaries of state as the leading officials of the state's administrative agencies—shall not be elected, to the Presidium.
Article 29. (1)

The Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic' shall: a) schedule the parliamentary elections; b) convoke Parliament; c) introduce bills.;. d) have the right to call for a referendum in questions of national significance; e) conclude and ratify international agreements in the name of the. Hungarian People's Republic; f) appoint and receive ambassadors and envoys;
Article 30. (1)

g) elect professional judges; h) appoint secretaries of state and government employees for important assignments as determined by law, as well as higher ranking officers of the armed forces; i) establish and award the orders and titles of the Hungarian People's Republic and approve the acceptance of foreign orders and titles; j) exercise the right to grant amnesty. (2) The Presidium shall supervise the implementation of the Constitution. Within this jurisdiction, it shall annul or amend all such statutory provisions, administrative resolutions, or actions which are in conflict with the Constitution. (3) The Presidium shall exercise constitutional supervision over the local councils; it shall a) schedule the general elections of the councils; b) take care of the protection of the rights of the councils; c) dissolve a council any activity of which violates the Constitution or seriously, jeopardizes the interests the people. (4) The Presidium shall decide on all matters that are referred to its jurisdiction by a special law. (5} The Presidium shall exercise the jurisdiction of Parliament if Parliament is not in session; however, it may not amend the Constitution. (6) Statutory provisions enacted by the Presidium are 'edicts. These shall be presented to Parliament at the next session thereof.

a

Article 31. (1) The Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic, in the event of war or danger which seriously jeopardizes the security of the state, may create a defense council empowered with extraordinary jurisdiction. (2) The danger that seriously jeopardizes the security of the state, and the termination thereof, shall be established and promulgated by the Presidium. Article 32. (1) The mandate of the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic shall expire when Parliament elects a new Presidium. (2) The Presidium shall be responsible to Parliament and shall tender a report of its activities to Parliament. (3) Parliament shall have the right to recall the. Presidium or any member thereof. (4} In addition to the Chairman and the Secretary, the presence of at least nine members shall constitute a quorum of the Presidium.

(5) The Chairman and the Secretary shall sign any resolution or measure of the Presidium. Its edicts shall be promulgated in the official gazette. (6) If the Chairman or the Secretary of the Presidium is prevented [from acting], the Deputy Chairman or a member designated by respectively. the Presidium shall	 (7) The Presidium itself shall establish its own standing orders.

Chapter III. The Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People's Republic Article 33. (1) The Council of Ministers [government] shall consist of: a) the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; b) the Deputy Chairmen; c) the Ministers of State; d) the ministers in charge of the different ministries and the Chairman of the National Planning Board. (2) Parliament, upon the recommendation of the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic, shall elect or relieve the Council of Ministers, the Chairman, and the members of the Council of Ministers. (3) Members of the Council of Ministers shall have the right to participate and to a voice in the sessions of Parliament. Article 34. The list of the ministries of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be determined by a special law. Article 35. (1) The Council of Ministers shall: a) protect and ensure the public and social order and the rights of citizens; b) assure the implementation of the laws and edicts; c) direct the work of the ministries and other agencies directly subordinated to it, and coordinate their activities; d) direct the councils and supervise of the legality of their activities; e) assure the preparation of the national economic plan, and ensure the implementation thereof; f) determine the direction of scientific and cultural development, [and] assure the personal and material conditions necessary thereto; g) determine the system of social and health services, and assure the financial funding thereof;

h) conclude and approve international agreements; i) perform all the duties referred to its jurisdiction by statutory provisions. (2) The Council of Ministers shall issue decrees and pass resolutions in the discharge of its duties. These shall be signed by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers. A decree or resolution of the Council of Ministers shall not conflict with any law or edict. Decrees of the Council of Ministers shall be promulgated in the official gazette. (3) The Council of Ministers shall annul or amend all statutory provisions, resolutions, or dispositions issued by subordinate agencies that are in conflict with a law or violate the public interests. (4) The Council of Ministers shall annul such ordinances or resolutions of the councils as violate the interests of society. Article 36. The Council of Ministers, in the discharge of its duty, shall cooperate with the social organizations concerned. Article 37. (1) The Chairman of the Council of Ministers shall preside over the meetings of the Council of Ministers and provide for the implementation of the decrees and resolutions of the Council of Ministers. (2) The ministers shall, in accordance with the statutory provisions and the resolutions of the Council of Ministers, manage the branches of state administration within their jurisdiction and direct the subordinate agencies. (3) The Chairman, Deputy Chairmen, and members of the Council of Ministers in the discharge of their duties may issue decrees. These, however, shall not conflict with any law, edict, and decree or resolution of the Council of Ministers. The decrees shall be promulgated in the official gazette. Article 38. A Secretary of State assigned to direct an agency with nationwide jurisdiction, in the discharge of his duty as determined by the Council of Ministers, may issue dispositions which shall be binding upon government agencies, enterprises, cooperatives, and other economic institutions. These shall be promulgated in the official gazette. Such dispositions shall not conflict with any law, edict, decree, or resolution of the Council of Ministers, or with the decrees of the ministers. Article 39. (1) The Council of Ministers shall be responsible for its activities to Parliament. It shall render reports regularly about its work to Parliament.

(2) Members of the Council of Ministers and the secretaries of state shall be responsible to the Council of Ministers and to Parliament; they shall render reports on their activities to the Council of Ministers and to the Parliament. Their legal status and the manner of impeachment shall be regulated by a special law. Article 40. (1) The Council of Ministers may create governmental commissions to perform certain duties. (2) The Council of Ministers may act directly, or through a member thereof, in any matter pertaining to state administration. (3) The Council of Ministers shall have the right to place any branch of the state administration under its direct supervision and to create separate agencies for this purpose.

Chapter IV. The Councils Article 41. (1) The territory of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be divided into the Capital, counties, cities, and townships. (2) Counties may be divided into districts; the Capital and the major cities into boroughs. Article 42. (1) Councils shall be formed in the Capital, in counties, in the boroughs of the Capital, and in cities and townships. A joint council may be formed by more than one township. (2) Members of the councils shall be elected for a term of five years. (3) The council shall discharge its duties with the active participation of the population; in its work, it shall seek the support of social organizations and shall cooperate with agencies not under the council. (4) Members of councils shall regularly give an account of the work of the council and their own activities to their constituents. Article 43. (1) The council shall: a) represent the interests of the population and accomplish within its territorial venue the self-government of the working people; b) assure the attainment of the central state and local goals, the independent discharge of duties referred to its jurisdiction, the implementation of statutory provisions; c) determine on the basis of the national economic plan and the state budget its own plan and budget, direct and supervise the

implementation of the plans and the use of the budget, and independently manage its own financial means; d) assure territorial and settlement development, organize the fulfillment of the needs of the population; e) participate in guaranteeing the public and social order and the protection of socialist property. (2) The council, within its scope of activity shall issue ordinances or pass resolutions which, however, shall not conflict with any law, edict, decree, or resolution of the Council of Ministers, ministerial decrees, dispositions of a secretary of state, or with an ordinance of a higher-ranking council. Council ordinances shall be promulgated in the usual local manner.

Article 44. (1) The council shall elect an executive committee, form
committees, and create specialized agencies, and it may establish enterprises or institutions. (2) Detailed rules pertaining to councils shall be established by law.

Chapter V. The Judicial Organization Article 45. (1) The administration of justice in the Hungarian
People's Republic shall be vested in the Supreme Court of the Hungarian People's Republic, in county courts, and in district courts. (2) Special courts may be established by law to handle certain types of cases.

Article 46. Courts shall sit in panels consisting of professional
judges and lay assessors. Exceptions to this rule may be established by law.

Article 47. The Supreme Court of the Hungarian People's Republic shall exercise policy-making supervision over the judicial activities and practice of all courts. Directives of principle and decisions of principle rendered by the Supreme Court shall be binding upon all courts.

Article 48. (1) Judicial positions in the Hungarian People's Republic shall be filled through elections; the elected judges may be recalled for reasons determined by law. (2) The President of the Supreme Court shall be elected by

Parliament at its first session for a term lasting until the first session of the next Parliament. (3) Professional judges shall be elected by the Presidium of the Hungarian People's Republic in a manner established by law. Article 49. (1) Trials before the courts shall be open to the public, unless exceptions are established by law. (2) Persons under criminal proceedings shall be entitled to the right of defense in every phase of the proceedings. Article 50. (1) The courts of the Hungarian People's Republic shall protect and assure the state, economic, and social order, [and] the rights and lawful interests of citizens, and punish perpetrators of criminal acts. (2) Judges shall be independent and subject only to the law. (3) Rules pertaining to the courts shall be established by law.

Chapter VI. The Public Prosecutors Article 51. (1) The Chief Prosecutor of the Hungarian People's Republic and the organization of public prosecution shall ensure the consistent prosecution of every act violating or jeopardizing the legal order of society or the security and independence of the state, as well as the protection of the rights of the citizens. (2) Public prosecutors shall exercise supervision over the legality of the investigation and represent the state in criminal court proceedings. (3) Public prosecutors shall cooperate to assure that state, social, and cooperative agencies, as well as citizens, comply with the laws and shall make others comply as well. In case of any violation of the law, they shall take steps to defend legality. Article 52. (1) The Chief Prosecutor of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be elected by Parliament at its first session for a term lasting until the first session of the next Parliament. (2) The Chief Prosecutor shall be responsible to Parliament and shall render a report on his activities. Article 53. (1) The Chief Prosecutor of the Hungarian People's Republic shall appoint the public prosecutors. (2) The Chief Prosecutor shall manage and direct the organization of public prosecution.

(3) Rules pertaining to public prosecutors shall be established by law.

Chapter VII. Basic Rights and Duties of Citizens Article 54. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall respect human rights. (2) The rights of citizens in the Hungarian People's Republic shall be exercised in accordance with the interests of socialist society; the exercise of rights shall be inseparable from the fulfillment of the duties of citizens. (3) Rules pertaining to the basic rights and duties of citizens in the Hungarian People's Republic shall be established by law. Article 55. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall assure for its citizens the right to work, as well as remuneration commensurate with the quantity and quality of the work performed. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall implement this right through the planned development of the productive forces of the people's economy and by the manpower management based on the national economic plan. Article 56. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall assure for its citizens the right to rest. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall implement this right through the legal determination of working time, the assurance of a paid vacation, and assistance to organized recreation. Article 57. (1) The citizens of the Hungarian People's Republic shall have the right to protection of life, physical safety, and health. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall implement this right through organizing labor safety, health institutions, and medical care, as well as protecting the human environment. Article 58. (1) The citizens of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be entitled to financial support in the event of old age, illness, or disability. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall implement the right to financial support within the framework of social insurance and the system of social institutions. Article 59. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall assure the right to education of the citizens.

(2) The Hungarian People's Republic shall implement this right through extending public education to all in free and compulsory general schools, as well as through secondary and higher education, extension training of adults, and through giving financial assistance to persons who receive an education. Article 60. The Hungarian People's Republic shall assure the freedom of scientific work and artistic production. Article 61. (1) The citizens of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be equal before the law and shall enjoy equal rights. (2) The law shall severely punish every kind of discrimination against citizens on the grounds of sex, religious denomination, or nationality. (3) The Hungarian People's Republic shall guarantee equal rights to all nationalities living within its territory, the use of and education in their native language, and the preservation and promotion of their own culture. Article 62. (1) Men and women in the Hungarian People's Republic shall enjoy equal rights. (2) Equal rights for women shall be implemented by: the assurance of an opportunity for proper employment and working conditions; paid maternity leave in the event of pregnancy and childbirth; increased legal protection of mothers and children, as well as the system of maternity and child care institutions. Article 63. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall guarantee the freedom of conscience of citizens and the right to the free practice of religion. (2) The Hungarian People's Republic, in the interest of assuring freedom of conscience, shall separate the church from the state. Article 64. The Hungarian People's Republic, consistent with the interests of socialism and the people, shall guarantee freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly. Article 65. (1) The Hungarian People's Republic shall guarantee the right of association. A special law shall regulate the right of association. (2) Workers may form mass organizations and mass movements to protect the order and achievements of socialism, to promote increased participation in the socialist work of construction and public

life, to expand culture and educational work, to ensure the rights and duties of the people, and to promote international solidarity. Article 66. The Hungarian People's Republic shall guarantee the personal freedom and inviolability of citizens, the respect of the secrecy of correspondence, and the privacy of the home. Article 67. Whoever is prosecuted for his democratic attitude or for his activities in the interests of social progress, liberation of the people, and protection of the peace shall be entitled to the right of asylum in the Hungarian People's Republic. Article 68. (1) All citizens shall have the right to participate in the administration of public affairs; it shall be their obligation to meticulously discharge [the duties of] their public offices. (2) Citizens may offer suggestions in the public interest to the state or social organizations. These shall be judged on their merit. Article 69. It shall be the fundamental duty of the citizens of the Hungarian People's Republic to protect the assets of the nation, to strengthen socialist property, to increase the economic power of the Hungarian People's Republic, to enrich its culture, to protect the country's natural and cultural treasures, and to strengthen the order of society. Article 70. (1) The defense of the country shall be the duty of every citizen of the Hungarian People's Republic. (2) Citizens shall perform military service on the basis of the universal system of the draft. (3) The betrayal of the causes of the country and the people, violation of the military oath, desertion to the enemy, espionage, and any act detrimental to the military power of the state shall be severely punished by law.

Chapter VIII. The Basic Principles of Elections Article 71. (1) Citizens shall elect the members of Parliament, as well as the members of township, city, or Capital borough councils on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot. (2) Members of the Council of the Capital shall be elected by the borough councils and the members of county councils by the city and township councils by secret ballot.

(3) Members of Parliament or members of councils may be recalled by their constituents. Article 72. (1) All citizens of the Hungarian People's Republic who are of age shall have the right to vote. (2) Every citizen entitled to vote shall have one vote in elections. Every vote shall be equal. (3) The law shall establish the cases for exclusion from the suffrage. Article 73. (1) Whoever has the right to vote may be elected as a member of Parliament or a member of a council. (2) A special law shall regulate the election and recall of members of Parliament and members of councils.

Chapter IX. The Coat-of-Arms, The Flag, and the Capital of the Hungarian People's Republic Article 74. The coat-of-arms of the Hungarian People's Republic is as follows: a red-white-green escutcheon with arched sides in a light blue field surrounded by a wreath of wheat. The wreath shall be entwined on the left with a red, white, and green ribbon, and on the right with a red ribbon. Above the escutcheon a five-pointed red star, placed in the middle, shall cast golden rays on the field. Article 75. The flag of the Hungarian People's Republic shall be red, white, and green. Article 76. The Capital of the Hungarian People's Republic is Budapest.

Chapter X. Final Provisions Article 77. (1) The Constitution shall be the fundamental law of the Hungarian People's Republic. (2) The Constitution, as well as all constitutional statutory provisions, shall be equally binding on all agencies of the state and all citizens. (3) It shall be the duty of all agencies of the state and all citizens to comply with the Constitution and the constitutional statutory pro-

visions, and in the discharge of their duties, to make others comply with the same. Article 78. (1) The Constitution of the Hungarian People's Republic shall enter into force on the day of its promulgation; the Council of Ministers shall ensure the implementation thereof. (2) The Council of Ministers shall introduce in Parliament the bills required for the implementation of the Constitution. Pal Losonczi Chairman of the Presidium of the People's Republic

Lajos Cseterki
Secretary of the Presidium of the People's Republic

