Fundamental principles of the Constitution of the Hungarian Republic of Councils1
1. In the Republic of Councils, the proletariat took all freedom, rights and power in hand in order to terminate the capitalist order and the regime of the bourgeoisie, and to substitute these with the socialist production and social orders. The dictatorship of the proletariat, however, is only a tool for terminating all sorts of exploitation and class rule, and the preparation of a type of social order that knows no classes and in which the authority of the state, the supreme instrument of class rule, ceases.  
2. The Republic of Councils is a republic of the councils of workers, soldiers, and peasants.  
The Republic of Councils grants no place in any type of council to the exploiters. 
In councils of workers, soldiers, and peasants, the working people make and execute laws, and adjudicate upon those who break them.   
The proletariat exercises all central and local powers in the councils.
3.  The Republic of Councils is a free union of free peoples.
The Republic of Councils’ foreign policy seeks to attain peace in the world of workers with the help of the world revolution. It strives for peace based on the workers’ right to self-determination, without any conquests or war reparations. 
Instead of imperialism, which brought about the world war, the Republic of Councils wants the association and union of the world’s proletarians, and the international republic of workers’ councils. Therefore, it is against exploitative wars and every type of oppression and subjugation of peoples. It rejects the instruments of class state’s foreign policy, especially secret diplomacy.  
The rights and duties of workers in the Hungarian Republic of Councils
4. The Republic of Councils aspires for all the tools of production to be under the ownership of workers’ society in order to terminate exploitation, and for the organization and enhancement of production. Therefore, it places into public ownership every agricultural, industrial, mining and transport manufactory, which exceeds the level of a small manufactory. 
5. The rule of financial capital is terminated in the Republic of Councils by financial and insurance institutions becoming publically owned. 
6. Only those working have a place in the Republic of Councils. The Republic of Councils orders general forced labor, contrarily establishing the right to work. The state supports those who are unable to work and those who are willing to work but for whom the state cannot ensure labor. 
7. The Republic of Councils arms workers and dismantles exploiters in order to ensure power to the masses of workers and to hinder the restoration of the exploiters’ power. The Red Army is the class army of the proletariat. 
8. Workers shall be able to express their opinions freely in the Republic of Councils both orally and in writing, but that power of capital, which degraded the press to be an instrument for propaganda of the capitalist mentality and for blurring the proletariat consciousness, has ceased. The dependence of the press on capital has also ceased. The right of publishing all printed matter belongs to the workers, and the Republic of Councils ensures the free spreading of the socialist conception in the entire country. 
9. The workers’ freedom of assembly is complete in the Republic of Councils. Each member of the proletariat has the right to assemble freely and to organize processions. All obstacles have been removed from the workers’ freedom of assembly by breaking the domination of the bourgeoisie, and the Republic of Councils does not only grant complete freedom of assembly and organization to the workers and peasants, but it also grants all kinds of material and non-material assistance in order to educe and ensure their freedom of assembly. 
10. The Republic of Councils terminates the literacy privilege of the bourgeoisie, and opens the genuine possibility for workers to gain literacy. Therefore, it ensures free education, providing a high level of literacy, to workers and peasants. 
11. The Republic of Councils protects workers’ genuine freedom of opinion by entirely separating the church from the state, and the school from the church. Everybody can exercise freedom of religion.
12. The Republic of Councils proclaims the idea of the union of the world’s proletariats, and therefore, it grants all rights, which the Hungarian proletariat owns, to foreign proletariats, and authorizes each local council to declare foreign workers as Hungarian natives, based on their petitions.
13. Each foreign revolutionist has asylum in the Republic of Councils.
14. The Republic of Councils knows no distinction based on race or nationality. It does not tolerate any type of oppression of national minorities or limitation on the use of their language. Every person can use their native language freely, and each authority is obliged to accept a petition, which belongs to its jurisdiction and is written in any of the officially accepted languages in Hungary, and to audit and discuss with everybody in one’s native language.
The central organization of the council power
15. In the Republic of Councils the supreme power is exercised by the national congress of allied councils. 
16. All significant state matters fall within the competence of the national congress of allied councils, but especially:
i. the determination and modification of the Hungarian Republic of Councils’ constitution;
ii.  the determination and modification of the country’s borders;
iii. the declaration of war and conclusion of peace;
iv. the conclusion of international agreements;
v. the procurement of state loans;
vi. the supreme command of foreign and internal politics;
vii. the division of the country’s territory;
viii. the determination of local councils’ competence;
ix. the general command of the whole economy, and its specific sections;
x. the determination and modification of the monetary system, measures system, weights system;
xi. the determination of the budget of the Republic of Councils;
xii. the determination of public charges;
xiii. the determination of the defense organization;
xiv. the regulation of the law of nationality;
xv. the legislation in the fields of public law, private law, and criminal law; 
xvi. the supreme command of public education policy;
xvii. the determination of the judiciary’s organization;
xviii. the general or partial amnesty. 
All questions, upon which the national congress of allied councils establishes its competence, belong to the national congress of allied councils. In case the national congress of allied councils is not in session, the allied central executive committee exercises its competence. 
Nevertheless, unconditionally belong to the competence of the national congress of allied councils:
a. the determination and modification of the constitution;
b. the declaration of war and conclusion of peace;
c. the determination of the country’s borders.
17. The allied central executive committee convenes the national congress of allied councils at least twice a year. 
18. The allied central executive committee shall convene the national congress of allied councils in all of those cases when the convocation is requested by such councils of districts and towns, from which the total population amounts at least to one third of the country’s population.  
19. The allied central executive committee, which is elected by the national congress of allied councils, consists of a maximum of 150 members. In the allied central executive committee each nation, residing in the country, has adequate representation based on the ratio of its population. 
20. When the national congress of allied councils is not convened, the allied central executive committee is the supreme governing body of the country’s affairs; it exercises the supreme legislative, executive and judicial powers. 
The allied central executive committee also participates directly in managing state affairs. In addition to commissars, committees, which are co-ordinate to the commissariats and which supplement and revise the work of commissars, are also members of the allied central executive committee. In addition, in order to execute special tasks, the executive committee can constitute other committees among its members, and mandate its particular members to execute particular tasks. 
21. The allied central executive committee commands the operation of councils of workers, soldiers and peasants, and of all council bodies. It ensures the practical realization of the council constitution, and executes decisions of the national congress of allied councils.
22. The allied central executive committee reports to the national congress of allied councils on its operation. It reports on the general economic and political situation, as well as on particular, important questions. 
23. The allied central executive committee is responsible for its operation to the national congress of allied councils.
24. The allied central executive committee elects the Governing Council and its president.
25. The members of the Governing Council are commissars. The Governing Council appoints commissars to head particular commissariats, and divisions of the People’s Economy Council. A single commissar can be also appointed to head more commissariats, and some divisions of the People’s Economy Council. 
26. The Governing Council’s task is to govern the country’s affairs according to orders of the national congress of allied councils and the allied central executive committee. 
27. The Governing Council can issue decrees. It can generally perform everything which is necessary for the fast arrangement of state tasks. 
28. The Governing Council immediately notifies the allied central executive committee about its decrees, decisions, and measures in important matters. 
29. The allied central executive committee revises decrees, decisions and measures of the Governing Council, People’s Economy Council and all other commissariats, and it has the power to modify them. 
30. In case of significant state affairs, the Governing Council can act without a prior instruction of the national congress of allied councils only in extraordinary urgency. 
31. The Governing Council’s members are responsible to the national congress of allied councils and the allied central executive committee.
32. The particular commissariats are the following:
i. the People’s Economy Council,
ii. the foreign affairs,
iii. the defense, 
iv. the internal affairs,
v. the justice, 
vi. the public welfare and public health, 
vii. the public education,
viii. the German,
ix. the Rusyn. 
33. Decrees and orders can be issued by particular commissars within their commissariat’s competence, and by the People’s Economy Council on matters within its competence. Before issuing decrees of principal importance, the People’s Economy Council asks for the consent of the Governing Council. The Governing Council can modify decrees of the People’s Economy Council and the particular commissariats. 
34. The unified command of the distribution of production and goods, the issue and execution of decrees on economic management, the technical and economic supervision of the production and organs carrying-out distribution, belong to the competence of the People’s Economy Council. 
35. The divisions of the People’s Economy Council are as follows:
a. general command of production, materials management, and external trade,
b. agriculture and stock-raising, 
c. technical command of industrial production and industrial management,
d. financial management,
e. general nutrition,
f. transportation,
g. economic organization and supervision,
h. public construction,
i. labor. 
The commissar members of the People’s Economy Council together with the German and Rusyn commissars constitute the presidency of the People’s Economy Council. The right of determination belongs to the presidency. 
36. The board of the People’s Economy Council can contain a maximum of 80 members. Out of which the board of the Trade Union Council elects 40 members. These members of the board are automatically members of the national congress of allied councils. Additionally, other bodies of workers can also elect board members to the People’s Economy Council, whose number and election method are determined by the allied central executive committee, but they are not members of the national congress of allied councils.    
37. The presidency of the People’s Economy Council hears the board’s view in each important matter. 
The board can also make proposals to the presidency on its own initiative. 
The organization of the local councils
38. The district2 and city councils elect the members of the national congress of allied councils. The district and city councils send one member, per 50 000 inhabitants, to the national congress of allied councils.
39. The local councils of workers, soldiers and peasants manage the affairs of villages and towns. Regarding the question whether a community is a town or a village, generally the old administrative classification is determining until further measures are developed. Nevertheless, even if the old administrative classification stipulates otherwise, each community that has fewer than 6000 inhabitants qualifies as a village, and each community that has more than 25 000 inhabitants qualifies as a town.
40. The workers of the village send one member per 100 inhabitants to the village council. The council however, cannot consist of fewer than three and more than 50 members. 
41. The workers of the town send one member per 500 inhabitants to the city council. Towns cannot elect councils with more than 300 members. In Budapest districts constitute district councils, to which a district sends one member per 500 inhabitants. Nevertheless, the district council can consist of a maximum of 300 members. District councils send members to the central council of Budapest, consisting of 500 members, based on the proportion of their population. 
42. The village and city council constitute an executive committee for the direct administration of affairs. The executive committee can consist of a maximum of 5 members in villages, and a maximum of 20 members in towns and districts of Budapest. The central council of Budapest constitutes an executive committee, consisting of 80 members, which is headed by the central presidency, consisting of 5 members. The members of the central council’s executive committee are automatically members of the national congress of allied councils.    
43. Village and city councils establish the circuit councils of workers, soldiers and peasants. Villages and as well as adjacent towns send one member to the circuit council per 1000 inhabitants. Deputies of towns however, can maximum amount to be half of the members of the circuit council. Towns, which are adjacent to territories of more circuits in the same district (county), send members to every circuit council, but the number of the members sent by the towns to the circuit council cannot be more than half of the council altogether. The number of the circuit council’s members cannot exceed 60. 
44. Members of circuit councils are elected by members of city councils and village council’s electoral representative. Each village council elects one electoral representative. The election shall take place at the seat of the circuit when the circuit is not adjacent to any towns, or at the largest neighbouring town when the circuit is adjacent to one or more towns. 
45. The circuit council elects an executive committee, consisting of a maximum of 15 members, for the direct administration of affairs. 
46. The district (county) councils of workers, soldiers and peasants are elected by those city and circuit councils, which are located in the district. Cities with municipal rights, located in the district, also send members to the district council. One district council member shall be elected per 5000 inhabitants. The district executive committee determines the number of members sent to district and city councils by a town and a circuit. The number of the district council’s members cannot exceed 300. 
47. The district council elects an executive committee, consisting of no more than 40 members, for the direct administration of affairs.
48. It is the task of the councils of villages, cities and circuits to foster in any case the economic and cultural well-being of workers, residing in the particular village, town, circuit or district. To this end, they act in each locally important matter and execute the decrees of superior councils and commissariats, referred to them. 
49. The formerly existent organization of the local administration ceases. The personnel of offices and public utilities, taken over by councils, are subject to instructions of the councils. The official and other public buildings with their furniture become subject to instructions of the councils, if they have already been serving purposes of the local administration. 
50. The councils manage affairs by themselves through their convocations, or through their executive committees or other bodies. 
51. Councils can issue generally applicable decrees (statutes) in their competences; these decrees cannot be contrary to the decrees of superior councils, the Governing Council and commissariats. After issuing a statute, it has to be shown instantly to the immediate superior council, in cases of a district and town statute to the Governing Council.  
52. Councils are constantly monitoring whether the decrees of superior councils work in practice. They raise the attention of superior councils and/or commissariats to the deficiencies, and submit a proposal to them, if according to their observations there is a need for rule making or action, by a superior council or other authority. 
53. Councils maintain public utilities and institutions to satisfy the feeding, sanitary, economic, cultural etc. needs of inhabitants; they can establish new ones and propose such establishments to the superior council. 
54. Villages, towns, circuits and districts manage their finances independently, within the framework of the People’s Economy Council’s decree. 
55. Councils elect and dismiss officials and other skilled workers, including the personnel taken over from the previous administration.
Each Republic of Councils employee’s mandate can be revoked anytime. 
56. Councils elect their executive committees and the members to be sent to superior councils. The mandate of the elected can be revoked anytime by the majority of all council members, and not the majority of the ones present. 
57. Executive committees, elected by the councils, prepare and execute the decisions of councils, run the administration, insofar as it is not referred to a particular authority. 
Executive committees take urgent measures temporarily in those cases as well, which are referred to a particular authority. The council can repeal such measures.
The executive committee manages the property and manufacturies, remits to the petty cash though the president or vice president and a member of the committee, furthermore, monitors officials, commands the police force. 
58. The council can deploy a narrower special committee to handle particular matters, for which professionals can be elected in addition to members of the council. 
In districts, towns and circuits a special committee (subcommittee) should usually be constituted for the following matters: 1. economic, financial, industrial, 2. vehicular and public transport, 3. public welfare, demographic and public health, 4. housing, 5. general nutrition, 6. public education. 
Where local relations justify, more subcommittees can be merged or the management of affairs can be grouped differently.  
The division of village councils into subcommittees can be disregarded.
59. The executive committee is divided into subcommittees to the extent it is necessary, or it divides the management of affairs among its members otherwise. Members of the committee can be deployed for independent management of particular affairs. 
60. Councils hold regular sessions at least once per month, but if it is necessary an extraordinary session shall be hold based on the decision of the executive committee or on the request of the appropriate number of members, which number is determined in the standing order. 
The executive committee and other committees hold their sessions according to necessity. 
61. Councils and committees elect their presidents and vice presidents from their members on their own, who lead the deliberation, keep its order and represent the authority in external relations. An appropriate number of notaries shall be assigned from the officials. 
The language of the administration is determined by the standing order, framed by the council. Sessions are usually public. Members are obliged to appear at the session. The penalty for unjustified leave of absence is determined in the standing order. 
Decisions are accepted with a simple majority, unless the standing order or a special rule require otherwise. 
62. Councils are obliged to ensure that parties receive information on their affairs, without any kind of formality, in their mother tongue, quick and thorough; that appropriate agents are available for recording oral complaints and petitions; that after listening to the interested parties and completely clarifying the matter – possibly based on a direct approach of affairs - petitions shall be handled within the shortest time, without waiting to be urged, and parties are notified in an appropriate manner about it.    
63. There is a possibility usually only for a first degree and extraordinary complaint by interested parties, which can be initiated at the authority making the decision within 15 days, orally or in writing, and which is decided by the immediate superior authority or by its council delegated to the particular purpose. 
64. Executive committees are responsible to the councils that have sent them. Village councils and executive committees are monitored by the circuit council and executive committee; circuit councils, and city councils and their executive committees of towns with less than 25 000 inhabitants are monitored by the district council and its executive committee; district councils, and city councils and their executive committees of towns with more than 25 000 inhabitants are monitored directly by the national congress of allied councils, and/or the allied central executive committee, and the Governing Council. 
The superior council or executive committee has the right to modify all decisions of the subordinate council ex officio. 
65. In order to decide which matters fall within the jurisdictions of the village, town and circuit, and district authorities, the guiding criterion is that the matter is handled by the superior authorities within their competencies only if the significance of the matter exceeds, either territory or affected population wise, the competence of the particular local authority, and also if the particular need can be satisfied preferably only in a wider manner. 
In case of doubt councils can handle all those matters which previous authorities, replaced by the councils, were handling. 
Controversies are decided by the allied central executive committee, and/or the Governing Council. 
The suffrage
66. In the Hungarian Republic of Councils only workers have suffrage. Regardless of their gender all of those can vote and be voted for as a council member, who are eighteen years old and live from a socially useful work, like workers or employees etc. or perform domestic work, which enables the work of the previously mentioned workers or employees etc. Furthermore, soldiers of the Red Army and those workers and soldiers of the Republic of Councils, who lived of useful work but have fully or partially lost the ability to work, have the right to vote and to be voted for.   
67. Citizens of other states also have the right to vote and to be voted for if they satisfy the above-mentioned conditions. 
68. Not eligible to vote or to be voted for:
a. those who employ wage workers with the purpose of gaining profit,
b. those who live on income not derived from work,
c. vendors,
d. pastors and monks,
e. mental patients and those under guardianship,
f. those whose political rights are suspended for committing a crime with a base reason, for the period of time determined in the court’s decision.
69. The allied central executive committee establishes election committees for managing the city council election in all towns and in each district in Budapest. The allied central executive committee establishes separate election committees for managing the village and circuit councils elections at the seats of districts, which have the right to appoint separate committees for bigger communities or entire circuits.     
70. Voting is taking place secretly in front of teller committees, by submitting lists containing the candidates’ names. Those candidates shall be considered to be elected, who receive most of the votes. 
71. More teller committees shall be established in those villages and towns, where the number of voters require.
72. Members of teller committees are sent by the election committee. 
73. Two minutes shall be taken of the voting. All members of the teller committee sign both copies.   
74. Both copies of the minutes shall be sent to the election committee with competence. 
75. Election committees declare the result of council elections. Two minutes are taken of the result declaration. One copy of the minutes is sent to the allied central executive committee, which can override the declaration of results, and it can annul irregular elections.   
76. After the election of village and city councils occurs the election of circuit councils, that is followed by the election of district councils, that is followed by the election of the national congress of allied councils occurs. The national congress of councils decides ultimately about all sorts of election’s validity. Councils are formed for six months. 
77. A new election shall be ordered if it is requested by at least one third of those voters, who voted at the previous election. 
Voters can revoke council members’ mandates by a new vote, the same way as they elected them. 
The law of the budget
78. The financial policy of the Republics of Councils is solely determined by satisfying the needs of workers. It pays no regard to income that is not derived from work. 	
79. Bodies of the Republic of Councils can collect revenues and disburse expenditures only in the framework of the approved budget. 
80. Village, circuit, town and district budgets are determined by the respective local council based on the executive committee’s proposal, the budget of the Republic of Councils is determined by the Governing Council, and/or by the national congress of allied councils based on the proposal of the allied central executive committee.
81. Budgets of the local councils are approved by the immediate superior council, budgets of the district and city councils are approved by the Governing Council, and/or by the allied central executive committee. The superior council’s right of modification (64.) also exists regarding the decision of budget approval.      
The approving authority can exceptionally permit the use of the amounts, anticipated for particular expenditures and determined by the budget, for different purposes, and in case of necessity it can permit such expenditures that are not or insufficiently covered in the budget.
The Governing Council can permit transfer of loans, additional loans or exceptional loans regarding remittances of commissariats; such permission shall be immediately communicated to the central monitoring committee of the Republic of Councils.   
82. Local councils cover their expenses either from amounts made available in the budget by the Republic of Councils, or by those incomes that are assigned by the national congress of allied councils or the allied central executive committee to local councils in order to cover local needs. 
83. The Republic of Councils monitors adherence to the budget and financial management in general through a central committee, consisting of three members. 
The central monitoring committee is elected by the allied central executive committee, and it is responsible only to the allied central executive committee and/or to the national congress of allied councils. Its agents can scrutinize statements of councils and council bodies anytime, and it can require a statement from all councils and council bodies. The allied central executive committee makes a report on the result of its inspection from time to time, and proposes recommendations necessary for the financial management’s order. 
Rights of nations in the Hungarian Republic of Councils
84. Each nation residing in the Hungarian Republic of Councils can freely use its language, nurture and develop its national culture. To this end each nation can constitute a nationwide council for the development of its culture, even if it does not reside on a continuous territory. This organization cannot disrupt the territorial based council project. 
German and Rusyn nationwide councils elect German and Rusyn commissars. German and Rusyn commissariats govern affairs of German and Rusyn nationwide councils, and those of national district councils. 
85. As a consequence of the council system, the workers of those nations govern the local administration everywhere, who are in majority in the particular local circle. This is also expressed by the language of the local administration. Nevertheless, local minorities can also use their languages when communicating with council bodies.  
86. Independent districts shall be established where one nation’s workers are in majority on a continuous territory that extends to more circuits. 
Districts can merge into a national district where one nation is in majority on a continuous larger territory that extends to more districts. 
District councils send members to the national district central council, one per 10 000 inhabitants. The national district central council and its executive committee cannot consist of more members than the district council and its executive committee. 
Districts merged in this manner are parts of the Hungarian Republic of Councils through the national district. The council of the national district and its executive committee are superior authorities above all local councils and their executive committees, which are established in the national district. The Republic of Councils communicates with the territory of national districts through central council bodies of national districts. A direct consequence of the council system is that national district councils manage the internal administration, justice and public education of districts in question independently. 
87. The constitution of the Republic of Councils already acknowledges the Hungarian continuous districts with German and Rusyn majorities as German and Rusyn national districts. 
In cases of affairs affecting universal interests of the Republic of Councils, instructions of the Republic of Councils apply to national districts as well. 
In order to protect interests in connection with their national life, German and Rusyn commissariats establish mediatory departments at particular commissariats and at the People’s Economy Council. 
88. The Hungarian Republic of Councils does not obstruct the constitution of separate republic of councils allied to the Republic of Councils by the nations of territories to be liberated, which are capable to do so due to their population and financial strength.
89. The constitution’s provisions on the rights of nations can be modified only with the approval of the interested nations’ nationwide workers councils. 
Note 1. The constitution was published in Vol. 78. Republic of Councils (28th of June, 1919).
2. By the promulgation of the new constitution the temporary constitution, determined by the XXVI. decree of the Revolutionary Governing Council, loses its effect.
1 Same as ‘Hungarian Soviet Republic.’ 
2 ‘Kerület’ is translated here as ’district,’ and ’járás’ as circuit. 
