WE, Christian X, by the Grace of God, King of Iceland and Denmark, the Wends and the Goths, Duke of Slesvig, Holstein, Stormarn, Ditmarsken, Lauenburg and Oldenburg, make known: The Alting has twice, according to article 21 of the constitutional law of the 19th June, 1915,(2) adopted, and we have sanctioned and confirmed, the following constitutional law for the Kingdom of Iceland:-I. 1. The form of government is a limited monarchy. 2. The legislative power appertains to the King and the Alting jointly; the executive power belongs to the King and the administration of justice belongs to the judges.
ART. 3. The succession to the throne is provided for in articles 1 and 2 of the Act of Succession of the 31st July, 1853.(3) The succession cannot be altered without the approval of the Alting. 4. The rules in force in Denmark on the 1st December, 1918, regarding the King's religion and majority and the execution of the Royal power in case of the King's illness, minority or absence from either of the two States shall also be in force in Iceland. 5. The King cannot become sovereign of any other country without the approval of the Alting. 6. When the King assumes the government he shall take the oath to the constitution should he not have taken the oath as heir apparent. Two identical original copies of the oath shall be drawn up. One copy shall be deposited with the Alting and the other in the national archives. 7. The successor to the throne comes of age when he has completed his 18th year. 8. The establishments of the King and the Royal Family are fixed by law. 9. With the restrictions laid down in this constitutional law, the King is endowed with supreme authority over all the affairs of the Kingdom and exercises the same through the Ministers. The Ministry has its seat in Reykjavik. 10. The King is irresponsible and inviolable. The Ministers are responsible for the entire conduct of the Govern. ment. Their responsibility is laid down by law. The Alting can bring action against them for their administration. Such cases are judged by the Superior Court. 11. The King appoints and dismisses the Ministers. He decides their number and the distribution of their official work. 12. Laws and important Government measures shall be fiubmitted to the King at a State Council. The Council consists of all the Ministers, and the heir apparent has a seat on the Council when he is of age. The King presides at the State Council. The King may hold a meeting of the State Council outside Iceland with one single Minister. 13. New legal measures and important Government affairs shall be discussed at a Ministerial Council. Ministerial Councils shall also be held when one of the Ministers wishes to submit any matter to the Council. These meetings are presided over by a Minister appointed by the King to be Prime Minister. The Minister who exercises the presidency is called the "Prime Minister." 14. In the King's absence from the country the Prime Minister shall, as a rule, submit matters to the King, and also on behalf of the other Ministers, in their absence. When a Minister submits any matter to the King which is signed by another Minister, he is responsible for its correct presentation; he is not, however, specially responsible in any other way, provided he has not otherwise taken over the constitutional responsibility for the matter. 15. The King's signature to any matter of legislation or Government renders such matter valid provided the signature of a Minister accompanies it. 16. The King makes appointments to all Government offices to the same extent as formerly. Amendments may be made by law. No one but an Icelandic subject can be appointed to a Government post. Every official shall take an oath or give his word of honour to keep the constitutional law. The King can discharge officials appointed by him. The King can transfer civil servants from one office to another, on condition, however, that they do not suffer any loss as regards their official salary, and that they may choose between the official transfer and resignation with the authorised pension or the authorised old-age relief. Exceptions for certain classes of officials, besides those mentioned in article 57, can be laid down by law. 17. The King concludes treaties with other States. The King cannot, however, without the consent of the Alting, enter into such treaties as involve surrender of, or impose obligations on, any part of land or sea territory, or which modify present constitutional conditions. 18. The King shall convoke the Alting every year and shall decide when the session shall close. The Alting session cannot close before the budget has been enacted. The King can also summon the Alting to extraordinary sessions. 19. The King can prorogue the Alting meetings to a fixed time, but not for a longer period than 2 weeks, without the consent of the Alting, and that not more than once a year. 20. The King can dissolve the Alting, and in such cases writs for new elections shall be issued within 2 months of the dissolution, and the Alting shall be convoked not later than 8 months after its dissolution. 21. The King can introduce bills and other proposals in the Alting. 22. The King's sanction is required to enact an Alting resolution. The King superintends the promulgation and execution of the laws. Should the King not have sanctioned a bill passed by the Alting before the commencement of the next session of the Assembly it shall be dropped. 23. In particularly urgent cases, when the Alting is not in session, the King can issue provisional laws. Such laws, however, must not be at variance with the constitution. They shall always be submitted to the Alting at the following session. Should the Alting not adopt a law issued provisionally, the latter shall be dropped. Should a budget for the financial period be adopted by the Alting, a provisional budget cannot be decreed. 24. The King can decide, when special circumstances require it, that proceedings shall not be instituted for a crime. He pardons and grants amnesty, but it is only with the Alting's approval that he can exempt Ministers from impeachment or pronounce pardon in the case of punishments to which they have been sentenced by the Superior Court. 25. The King accords exemptions and dispensations from the law, either directly or through competent Government authorities, according to the rules hitherto followed. II. 26. 40 members, elected by the people, have seats in the Alting. Their number can be changed by law. The Alting is composed of two Houses, the Upper and the Lower House. The Lower House has 26 members and the Upper House has 14 members. These numbers can be changed by law. 34 members of the Alting shall be elected in special constituencies by ordinary elections, while 6 shall be elected by proportional representation in the whole country together. It may be decided by law that the Alting members for the town of Reykjavik shall be elected by proportional representation. The regulations in force for eligibility and franchise at ordinary elections shall be applicable in such cases. Members elected by proportional representation for the whole country have all seats in the Upper House, as also 8 members, who are elected by the united Alting from the members elected in special constituencies. The remaining members have seats in the Lower House. 27. Members elected in special constituencies are chosen for a period of 4 years, while members elected by proportional representation for the whole country are chosen for a period of 8 years, and half the number of these retire every fourth year. Dissolution of the Alting does not affect the members elected by proportional representation for the whole country. 28. Should a member, elected in a special constituency, die or resign during an election period, a new member shall be elected in his stead for the remaining time of the election period. Should a vacancy occur in the same manner among the members elected by proportional representation for the whole country, the substitute concerned shall take the vacant seat. There shall be the same number of substitutes as there are members elected by proportional representation for the whole country; they shall be elected in the same manner and simultaneously. This shall also take place when a member who has been elected by proportional representation for the whole country is prevented from taking his seat in an ordinary or extraordinary Alting session or for the remaining period of the session. 29. All persons, men and women, who have attained the age of 25 years at the time of the election, are subjects of the country and have had their residence there for 5 years preceding the election, possess the franchise for elections to the Alting in special constituencies. No one may, however, possess the franchise unless he or she has an unblemished reputation, has had a permanent residence in the constituency for 1 year, and has control of his or her property. besides not having received poor relief which has not been refunded. A married woman is considered as having control of her property even though she lives with her husband and they hold their goods in common. Men and women who are 35 years of age or older shall enjoy franchise rights on the same conditions at the proportional representation elections for the whole country. The election law lays down further regulations for the elections and for the sequence in which the substitutes shall replace the members in the Upper House. 30. Every national who is eligible to vote in special constituencies shall also be eligible for election, even though he be domiciled outside the constituency or has been domiciled there less than 1 year. Any men or women who have completed their 35th year are eligible under the same conditions for election by proportional representation for the whole country. Judges who are not also administrative officials are, however, ineligible. 31. The Alting shall assemble every year in ordinary session on the 15th February, or on the following weekday should the 15th be a holiday, unless the King has fixed another day earlier in the year for assembling. These provisions can be altered by law. 32. The Alting is inviolable. No person may assail its peace or freedom. 33. The place of assembly is generally Reykjavik. In extraordinary circumstances the King may decide that the Alting shall assemble at another place in Iceland. 34. Each House of the Alting is entitled to introduce and, as far as itself is concerned, adopt bills and other resolutions. Each House separately and the united Alting may likewise present addresses to the King. 35. Each House can appoint commissions composed of its members to investigate matters of general importance. The House may authorise these commissions to demand written or verbal information from Government officials or private individuals. 36. No taxation can be imposed, modified or abolished except by law. No loan which places any obligation on the country can be raised, neither can any estate belonging to the country, or the right to exploit it, be sold or disposed of in any other way than by law. 37. No expenses may be defrayed without the authority of the budget or the supplementary estimates. 38. Immediately after the opening of every ordinary session of the Alting a budget shall be introduced for the following financial year containing an estimate of the State's receipts and expenditure. The draft budget and supplementary estimate shall always be submitted to the Lower House of the Alting first. 39. The united Alting shall elect 3 auditors, who shall be remunerated for their work. They shall be elected by proportional representation. These auditors shall examine the annual accounts of State receipts and expenditure thoroughly. They shall verify that the State receipts are all entered, and that no expenditure has been made without authorisation. Separately or two or all three together they can demand that all necessary information and documents be communicated. These accounts are then collected and made up into one statement for each financial period, and they are presented to the Alting in the form of a bill for approval, minuted by the auditors. One or more of the auditors are authorised to have access to the Treasury and to ministerial accounts and books for the current or past year. Should they have any remarks to pass they shall communicate their observations in writing to their successors. 40. No bill can be finally passed before it has been read three times in each House of the Alting. 41. When a bill has passed one of the Houses of the Alting it shall be presented in the form in which it is passed to the other House. Should it be amended there, it shall be returned to the first House. Should it be re-amended there the bill shall be re-introduced in the other House. Should no agreement be reached, both Houses shall unite in a General Assembly and the question shall be settled after one discussion. In order to secure a final passage in the united Alting it is required that more than one-half of the number of the members of each House be present and take part in the division; the various points shall be decided by simple majority, whereas at least two-thirds of the votes cast are required for the final adoption of bills, excepting the budget and the supplementary estimates. 42. The Alting itself shall decide on the validity of the election of its members, and also whether a member has lost his eligibility. 43. Every new member shall immediately after the validity of his election has been acknowledged take an oath or give his word of honour to keep the constitutional law. 44. The members of the Alting are only bound by their convictions and not by any instructions from the electorate. Government officials who are elected to the Alting do not require the Government's sanction to accept their mandate, but they are obliged to see that their official duties are carried on in a manner satisfactory to the Government without any extra charge to the Treasury. 45. During the sessions of the Alting no member thereof may, without the authorisation of the House of which he is a member, be arrested for debt or imprisoned or have an action brought against him unless he be caught in flagrante delicto. No member of the Alting can be held responsible outside the same for statements made in Parliament, without the sanction of the House in question. 46. Should a member of the Alting lose his eligibility, he shall lose the right which he holds by election. 47. By virtue of their office Ministers have a seat in the Alting and are authorised to speak in Parliament as often as they wish, provided they observe the rules. They may, however, only vote if they are members of the Alting. 48. Each House and the united Alting shall themselves elect their Presidents. 49. Neither of the Houses of the Alting can take any decision unless more than one-half of the members are present and take part in the voting. 50. Each member of the Alting may bring any public question up for discussion in the House of which he is a member, provided the House agrees, and he may demand an explanation from the Ministers. 51. No matter can be introduced in any of the Houses unless by a member. 52. Should the House not propose to take any decision in a matter it can refer the same to the Ministers. 53. The meetings of both Houses and of the united Alting shall be public. The President or the number of members determined by the rules of procedure may demand that all persons not concerned retire, whereupon Parliament shall decide whether the matter shall be dealt with at a public meeting or in camerd. 54. The rules of procedure of the united Alting and of both Houses are established by law. IV. 55. The exercise of the judicial power can only be regulated by law. 56. The judges shall settle all disputes regarding the limits of the authority of a magistrate. Anyone desiring to raise such questions cannot, however, by bringing the case. before the court, evade complying temporarily with the orders of the magistrate. 57. The judges shall, while in office, only conform to the law. Judges who do not also attend to administrative business cannot be displaced except by judgment, neither can they be transferred against their wish, unless in the case of a re-arrangement of the courts. Any judge who has attained his 65th year can, however, be discharged, but without loss of salary. V. 58. The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the national church of Iceland and shall as such be supported and protected by the State. This may be modified by law. 59. Citizens have a right to unite in communities to worship God in the way which tallies best with their conviction, but they must not teach or undertake anything which is against morality or public order. 60. No one can be deprived of the full enjoyment of his civil and political rights or evade the fulfilment of any duty as a citizen on account of his creed. No one shall be obliged to give any personal contribution to any other divine worship than his own. Anyone outside the national church shall pay to the University of Iceland or to a sustentation fund attached to that college the same contributions as he would otherwise have given to the State Church provided, however, that he does not belong to any other religious community acknowledged in the country. Amendments may be made by law.
VI. 61. Anyone who is arrested must without delay be brought before a judge, and should he not be discharged immediately, the judge shall decide within 24 hours, giving his reasons for the finding, whether the person arrested shall be imprisoned. Should it be possible to liberate him on bail, the nature and the amount of the security shall be decided in the award. Appeal can at once be made against the judge's award to a higher court; with regard to notification and appeal the procedure is the same as in criminal cases. No one can be kept under remand for an offence which only incurs a fine or ordinary imprisonment. 62. A man's dwelling is inviolable. Domiciliary search, seizure and examination of letters and other papers can only take place in accordance with a judicial decision or pursuant to special legal authority. 63. The right of possession is inviolable. No one can be obliged to surrender his property, unless for the benefit of the public weal; this can only be done by law and on full compensation being paid. 64. No foreigner can acquire nationality except by law. A foreigner's right to possess real property in the country shall be regulated by law. 65. No restrictions on the freedom of trade can be made except by law or for reasons of public welfare. 66. Anyone who is unable to support himself or his family, and whose maintenance is not the obligation of any other person, is entitled to receive relief from public funds, but shall in this case be subject to such obligations as the law prescribes. 67. Should parents not possess means to provide for the education of their children, or should the children be orphans or poor, their instruction and maintenance shall be provided for out of public funds. 68. Every person has a right to publish his thoughts in print; he is, however, responsible to the courts. Censorship and other hindrances of the freedom of the press can never be established by law. 69. Citizens have a right to establish associations for No every lawful purpose, without obtaining permission. A society can be dissolved by a Government measure. society can nevertheless be provisionally prohibited, but action must immediately be brought against it for its dissolution. 70. Citizens have a right to assemble unarmed. The police have a right to be present at public assemblies. Open air meetings may be prohibited should it be feared that danger of disturbances might ensue.
71. Every able-bodied man is bound to take personal part in the defence of the country according to detailed regulations which may be laid down by law. 72. The right of the communes to manage their own affairs under the inspection of the Government is laid down by law. 73. Taxation shall be regulated by law. 74. No privilege attached to nobility, title or rank may be established by law. 75. In accordance with the Dano-Icelandic Union Law(') Danish subjects shall enjoy, under like conditions, such rights as are described in articles 16, 29 and 30 and are attached to Icelandic nationality. 76. Proposals to amend or supplement the present constitutional law can be introduced at an ordinary or an extraordinary session of the Alting. Should the proposal be adopted by both Houses of the Alting, the Alting shall immediately be dissolved and writs issued for a new general election. Should the resolution be adopted unaltered by both Houses of the Alting and be sanctioned by the King, it shall be valid as a constitutional law. Should the Alting adopt an amendment of the Law of Union between Iceland and Denmark, the matter shall be submitted for approval or rejection to a referendum of all enfranchised persons in the country; this voting shall be secret. The same procedure shall be applicable in the case of an amendment in the organisation of the Church in accordance with article 58. 77. This constitutional law shall enter into force on the 1st January, 1921. Simultaneously the constitutional law concerning the special affairs of Iceland dated the 5tb January, 1874,(-) and the amending constitutional laws of the 3rd October, 1903, and the 19th June, 1915, shall be repealed. ProvisionalRegulations. 1. Persons who have acquired the franchise and eligibility as candidates prior to this constitutional law coming into force shall retain, under like conditions, these rights, even although they are not Icelandic subjects or persons enjoying equal rights in accordance with article 75. 2. Mandates of Alting members elected by the country, which are not due to expire in 1922, according to the drawing of lots in 1917, shall become void in the year 1926. 3. General, ordinary and unrestricted Alting elections shall take place in the year 1923. These elections may not, however, take place before the close of the ordinary Alting session in the same year. Done at Sorgenfri Castle, the 18th May, 1920. Under our Royal hand and Seal. (L.S.) CHRISTIAN R. concerning the Acquisition and Loss of Icelandic Nationality.-Reykjavik, June 15, 1926.