
In the Name of God THE CONSTITUTION OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 24 of Aban, 1358 of the Solar Year

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Beneficent,We sent our messengers with evidence and revealed the Book and gave them the Scales in order to establish justice among men.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN

PREAMBLE

The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran exemplifies the cultural, social, political and economic foundations of Iranian society. It is based upon Islamic principles and standards which reflect the heart-felt desires of the Islamic community. The nature of the great Islamic Revolution of Iran and the process of the struggle of the Moslem people from its beginning until the final victory, which were given form in hard-hitting and resolute slogans, expressed these fundamental desires. And now, at the dawn of this great victory, our nation wishes to achieve these desires with all its heart. The feature of this revolution which distinguishes it from other movements in Iran in the present century is that it is ideological and Islamic. The Moslem nation of Iran, having gone through both an anti-despotic constitutional movement and an anti-imperialist movement to nationalize oil, learned this valuable lesson -- that the fundamental and specific reason for the failure of these movements was that the struggle did not have an ideological base. Although the Islamic way of thinking and militant clerical leadership played a major and fundamental role in recent movements, these movements rapidly disintegrated because they became increasingly distant from the true Islamic position. At this point the alert conscience of the nation, led by His Eminence and Supreme Holiness the Ayatollah Imam Khomeini, realized the necessity of adhering to the true ideological and Islamic path of struggle. The militant clergy of the country, who have always been in the front line of the people's movement, along with writers and responsible intellectuals, gained new incentive at this time from its leadership. (The recent movement of the Iranian nation actually began in the Lunar Year, corresponding to 1341 of the Solar Year) 

THE DAWN OF THE MOVEMENT

The devastating protest of the Imam Khomeini against the "White Revolution," an American conspiracy which was a ploy to reinforce the foundations of a despotic government and to increase the political, cultural and economic dependence of Iran on international imperialism, caused the national movement to unify. The great and bloody revolution of the Islamic community followed this protest in the month of Khordad 1342, which was the starting point of the blossoming of this noble wide-spread uprising, and which strengthened the Imam's position as the center of Islamic leadership. Despite his banishment from Iran following his protest against the disgraceful Act of Capitulation (Immunity for American advisors), the strong ties between the nation and the Imam endured, and the Moslem nation, particularly the dedicated intellectuals and the militant clergy, continued on in the midst of banishment, imprisonment, torture and execution. Meanwhile the alert and responsible factions of society spread enlightenment from the strongholds of their mosques, theological institutes and universities. Inspired by the revolutionary and fertile doctrine of Islam, they began their continuous and decisive struggle to raise the level of awareness and struggling ideological consciousness of the Moslem nation. The despotic regime which tried to suppress the Islamic movement with savage attacks on the Feizieh Theological School, on the university, and on all the volcanic centers of the revolution, resorted to the most Futile measures to avoid the revolutionary anger of the nation. At the same time, death squads, medieval tortures and long-term imprisonment were the price that our Moslem nation paid as evidence of its determination to continue the struggle. The blood of hundreds of zealous young women and men who chanted at dawn "Allah-o-Akbar" (God is Great) in the squares with bullets flying, or who, in alleys and bazaars, became the targets of enemy fire, gave the Islamic revolution the strength to continue. Statements and messages continually issued by the Imam regarding various events increased both the depth and breadth of the awareness and determination of the Islamic community.

THE ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT

The plan for an Islamic Government based upon the concept of the Mandate of the Clergy, which was introduced by Imam Khomeini at the height of the efforts made by the tyrannical regime to crush and suppress the movement, gave a fresh, strong incentive to the Moslem people and opened the way for a genuine ideological Islamic struggle. This plan consolidated the efforts of those dedicated Moslems who were fighting both at home and abroad. The movement continued in this way until public discontent and anger with the ever-increasing suppression within the country, combined with disclosures made by the militant clergy and students of the crimes of the regime and subsequent publicity about them on a world-wide scale, seriously weakened the foundations of the sovereign power of the regime, and consequently forced the puppet regime and its masters to ease the level of suppression. They widened the so-called political space in the country to create what they thought would be a safety valve to avoid their inevitable collapse. But the furious, alert and determined nation, under the decisive and resolute leadership of the Imam, began its unified and victorious revolt on a wide scale. THE ANGER OF THE NATION The publication of a letter insulting to the sanctity of the clergy, and to Imam Khomeini in particular, on the 17th of Dai, 1356 by the ruling regime accelerated the movement and caused the anger of the people to erupt throughout the country. The regime, in order to control the volcanic rage of the people, tried to "drench the soil with blood " and put down the uprising in this way, but this action only pumped more blood into the veins of the Revolution, and the continuous beat of the heart of the Revolution on the Seventh and Fortieth Day (6) of the commemorations of the deaths of the martyrs increased the life, warmth and fervent solidarity of this movement throughout the country. As a result of the continuation of the people's movement, all of the institutions of the country, by means of a general strike and participations in street demonstrations, actively took part in bringing down the regime. The broad alliance of men and women from every walk of life and from every religious and political group in this struggle was obviously decisive. In particular women, in a very visible way, were present en masse at every stage of this great holy war. Scenes in which a mother holding a baby her arms would run towards the battlefield and towards the mouth of a machine-gun were indicative of the essential and decisive role of this great group of the society in the struggle.

THE PRICE PAID BY THE NATION

The shoot of the tree of Revolution, after over a year of constant strug g le, the spilling of the blood of more than 60,000 martyrs and 100,000 wounded and crippled, and billions of toman (7) in damages, finally matured and bore fruit amid the cries of "Independence, Freedom and Islamic Government." This great movement, based on the faith and unity of the people and on decisive leadership, was finally victorious and destroyed all the schemes, relationships, and institutions of the imperialists. It opened up a new chapter in the history of the revolutions of the peoples of the world. The 21st and 22nd of Bahman, 1327 (8) were the days on which the foundations of the monarchy, internal tyranny and foreign domination collapsed, and with this great victory the dawn of the Islamic government, which was the time-honored desire of the Moslem people, brought glad tidings of the final victory. The Iranian nation as one, with the participation of religious leaders and Islamic higher authorities, and that of the leader of the Islamic Revolution., announced in the referendum for an Islamic republic by a majority of 98.2i' its final and irrevocable decision for the new Islamic order. Now the constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, as an expression of the political, social, cultural and economic structure of the society, shall be the guide to strengthening the foundations of the Islamic government, and shall provide a new plan for government built on the ruins of the old Satanic order.

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GOVERNMENT IN ISLAM Government from the Islamic perspective does not stem from class position or the domination of an individual or a group, but is rather the realization of the political ideal of a nation which shares the same customs and way of thinking, and which organizes itself so that in the process of development of its thought and faith, it makes its way toward the ultimate goal (movement toward God). Our nation, during the process of its revolutionary development, cast off Satanic impurities and decadence, and cleansed its way of thinking of foreign influences, returning it to its original ways of thinking and to a genuinely Islamic world view. The nation now intends to construct a model society (9) in accordance with Islamic principles. Based on these principles, the purpose of the constitution is to make the basis of the ideology of the movement apparent and to create conditions under which mankind will develop through the lofty and universal values of Islam. The constitution, in respect to the Islamic content of the Iranian Revolution, a movement towards the victory of all oppressed people over the oppressors, creates a basis favorable to the endurance of this revolution at home and abroad. In particular, inasmuch as international relations are concerned, the constitution is an attempt, one also made by other Islamic and democratic movements, to open the way for the establishment of a unified world-wide community, This is your nation, which is one nation, and I am the Lord your God, and you shall worship Me and to give strength to the continuous struggle to rescue nations suffering from deprivation and injustice throughout the world. In view of the nature of this great movement, the constitution is a guarantee against any kind of ideological and social despotism and against economic monopolization, and is a step toward breaking away from a tyrannical system, as well as an attempt to place the fate of the people in their own hands. He frees them from captivity and from the chains which were on them. In establishing the political institutions and foundations which are the bases on which the society, an ideologically oriented one, is formed, the virtuous and competent are placed in charge of governing the country, The earth will be inherited by the virtuous servants and legislation which expresses the standards for managing the society revolves around the Koran and tradition. Thus precise and profound supervision by experts in Islam, the just, ascetics and dedicated people (the just clergy) is necessary and useful. Since the purpose of the government is to provide the conditions for mankind to develop in his movement toward Divine order Everything goes back to God so that ground is prepared to allow talents to blossom which will embody those characteristics of mankind which reflect the Divine, Do things in the way set by God and this cannot be achieved without the active and wide-spread participation of all elements of the community in the movement toward the development of the society. In regard to this aspect, the constitution provides the groundwork for such participation at all phases of significant political decision-making for all members of the community, so that in the process of attaining perfection, every individual takes part in and is responsible for his own growth, improvement and leadership. This will be the realization of the government of the oppressed on the earth And we wish to give the power to the weak of the earth and we will make them leaders and heirs

THE MANDATE TO THE JUST CLERGY

Based upon the concept of Mandate to the Imamate for the affairs of state, the constitution lays the groundwork for the realization of the leadership of a member of the eminent clergy who is recognized by the people as their leader The administration of affairs should be in the hands of those who know God -- who are faithful in doing what he has commanded and refraining from doing what he has forbidden in order to guarantee that various organizations do not deviate from their real Islamic duties.

THE ECONOMY AS A MEANS AND NOT AN END

The goal of strengthening the foundations of the economy is to fulfill the needs of mankind in its movement toward development and perfection, and not, as is the case with other economic systems, to concentrate and accumulate wealth, and to profiteer. For in materialistic schools of thought, the economy is per se a goal and for this reason, at various stages of development, the economy is the cause of destruction, corruption and decay. But in Islam the economy is a means and no one expects anything of a means except that it be efficient in accomplishing an end. The Islamic economic plan, based on this point of view, is designed to provide the proper groundwork to allow various forms of human creativity to emerge. Consequently, it is the responsibility of the Islamic Government to provide equal and suitable opportunities and employment for all individuals and to satisfy the needs of the people so that man can continuously move forward in his search for perfection.

WOMEN AND THE CONSTITUTION

With the establishment of a social Islamic foundation, human beings, whose energies until now were at the service of foreign exploitation from all quarters, will regain their original identities and human rights. It is natural that in the process of such a restitution, women, who have had to endure more injustice at the hands of the Satanic regime, will be able to enjoy their rights proportionately more.

The family is the basic social unit, and the principal institution for human growth and development. A consensus of beliefs and ideals for the purpose of establishing a family, which provides the basis for the movement of mankind toward perfection, is a cardinal principle of Islam, and the provision of the means to achieve such a goal is the duty of the Islamic government. With the restitution of the noble and respected duty of motherhood, to raise ideological men, woman will be in the vanguard and in fact the comrade of men, in all aspects of active life. Consequently, women will assume greater responsibilities, and from the Islamic point of view they will be held
in greater esteem.

THE IDEOLOGICAL ARMY

Faith and ideology should be the criterion and standard in establishing and equipping the country's defense forces. For this reason the Army of the Islamic Republic and the Revolutionary Corps will be formed in adherence with the afore-mentioned principle, and they will be responsible not only for safeguarding the borders, but also for accomplishing an ideological mission, that is, to strive for the "Jihad" for the sake of God, as well as for struggle to open the way for the sovereignty of the Word of God throughout the world. Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including steeds of war to strike terror into the hearts of the enemies of God and your enemies and others besides whom you may not know, but whom God does know.


THE JUDICIARY IN THE CONSTITUTION

The question of the judiciary, in regard to protecting public rights in accordance with the Islamic movement, and for the purpose of precluding deviations within the Islamic community, is a crucial one. Hence, the establishment of a judicial system based upon Islamic standards of justice and composed of equitable judges who are familiar with precise religious rules has been provided for. This system, because of its fundamental sensitivity and because of the necessity for its ideological precision, must be divorced from any unsound relationships and connections. And when you render judgment among the people, render it fairly.

THE EXECUTIVE POWER

The Executive Power, because of its special importance in enforcing Islamic rules and regulations governing society, which are designed to achieve just relationships, and because of the need for this crucial concept to lay the groundwork for the purpose of achieving the ultimate goal of life, shall open the way for establishing an Islamic society. Consequently, to be bound by any kind of complex restrictive system which would hamper or jeopardize the attainment of this goal from the Islamic perspective will not be permitted. For this reason the bureaucratic system, which is a product of the evil powers, shall be vehemently rejected so that a more efficient and speedier executive system can be established to fulfil its administrative obligations.

THE MASS MEDIA

The mass media (radio and television) shall be employed to promote Islamic culture and thereby aid the Islamic Revolution in its movement toward perfection. In this respect they should seek to profit from the healthy exchange of various ideas and vehemently refrain from promoting destructive and anti-Islamic practices. Adherence to this rule, which holds human freedom and decency to be its primary goal and opens the way for human development and perfection, is the responsibility of everyone. The Moslem community must actively participate in the building of an Islamic society by choosing competent and virtuous authorities and by continuously supervising their activities. Let us hope that in building a model Islamic community (osvah) which could serve as an example for all the peoples of the world, the Moslem community succeeds. Thus have we made of you a people justly balanced that ye might be witnesses over the nations.

THE REPRESENTATIVES

The Assembly of Experts, composed of the representatives of the people, after having examined proposals made by the government and all the proposals made by various groups of people, and with the aforementioned goals and motives in mind, completed formulating the constitution in twelve Chapters which contain 175 Articles. The constitution was completed at the dawn of the 15th century of the Hegira of the Prophet, may the blessing of God be upon him, and his issue, he who was the founder of the Islamic Religion, which redeems its followers. Let us hope that this century will be the century of the government by the the oppressed of the world and of the defeat of all oppressors.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN

In the Name of God, the Merciful and the Beneficent

CHAPTER I General Principles Article 1 The Government of Iran is an Islamic Republic, approved by the nation in the referendum of the 10th and 11th of the month of Farvardin, in the Solar Year 1358, and with the approval of 98.2% of the eligible voters. It is based upon the nations time-honored belief in the necessity for a government founded on truth and Koranic justice, and follows the victorious. Islamic Revolution led by His Eminence and Supreme Holiness Imam Khomeini.

Article 2 The Islamic Republic is a system based on belief in: 1) One God (There is no God but one) and the exclusive sovereignty of God, the acceptance of His rule, and the necessity of obeying His commands. 2) Divine Revelation and its fundamental role in expressing His Laws. 3) Resurrection and its constructive role in the evolution of mankind leading toward God. 4) The Justice of God in creation and in Divine Law. 5) The Imamate and continuous leadership and its basic role in giving strength and endurance to the Islamic Revolution. 6) The compassion of human beings and in their great worth.

These aims are to be achieved through: (a) judgment made on a continuous basis by the eminent clergy, based on the Book and traditions of the Saints, May God's blessings be upon them. (b) the utilization of advances in science, technology, and knowledge, and efforts to improve them. (c) the prohibition of all kinds of oppression, or acceptance of oppression; the prohibition of domination or acceptance of domination. Justice, as well as political, economic, social and cultural independence, and national independence will be secured through these concepts.

Article 3 The Islamic Republic of Iran, in order to attain the goals mentioned in Article 2, shall employ every possible means to achieve the following: 1) Creation of an environment favorable to the development of moral virtues, based on faith, piety, and the struggle against corruption and vice in any form. 2) Raising the level of public awareness in all fields, by a correct use of the press, the mass media and other means. 3) Free education and physical training for all at all levels, and providing facilities for the expansion of higher education. 4) Encouraging enthusiasm for research, investigation and initiative in all fields, i.e., scientific, technical, cultural and Islamic, by means of establishing research centers, and encouraging researchers. 5) Complete rejection of colonialism, and the prevention of foreign influence. 6) Elimination of all kinds of despotism, totalitarianism, and monopolization. 7) Securing political an social freedom within the limits of law. 8) Participation of all the people in the determination of their political, economic, social and cultural destiny. 9) Elimination of unfair discrimination, and creation of just opportunities for all, in all material and spiritual fields. 10) Creation of a sound administrative system, and elimination of unnecessary organizations. 11) Complete reinforcement of the foundations of national defense by means of public military training, to secure the independence, territorial integrity, and Islamic system of the country. 12) Laying the groundwork for a sound and just economy, based on Islamic principles, aimed at promoting the welfare of the people, the elimination of poverty and of all kinds of deprivations of food, housing, employment, health and general social insurance. 13) Becoming self-sufficient in science, technology, industry, agriculture, military affairs, and the like. 14) Securing every human right for both men and women, and establishing judicial security for all based on justice and the equality of all before the law. 15) Expansion and strengthening of the spirit of Islamic brotherhood and public cooperation among all the people. 16) Adoption of a foreign policy based on Islamic principles, brotherly commitment to all Moslems, and unsparing support for the oppressed peoples of the world.

Article 4 All civil, penal, financial, economic, administrative, cultural, military, political, laws and regulations, as well as any other laws or regulations, should be based on Islamic principles. This principle will in general prevail over all of the principles of the Constitution, and other laws and regulations as well. Any judgment in regard to this will be made by the clerical members of the Council of Guardians. Article 5 Until the appearance of the Saint of the Ages, (10) may God hasten his appearance, in the Islamic Republic of Iran the Mandate for state affairs for the Imamate of the Islamic community will be given to a just, spiritual, up-to-date, courageous, efficient, prudent person who is a member of the clergy and is recognized by the majority of the people as their leader. 

Should no member of the clergy be recognized by the majority as leader, the leader or council of leaders, consisting of members of the clergy who meet the requirements mentioned above, according to Article 107, shall assume the role of mandatary.

Article 6 The affairs of the country shall be administered in the Islamic Republic of Iran in accordance with public opinion, expressed through elections, i.e., election of the President of the Republic, Members of the National Assembly, Members of Councils, and the like, or by plebiscite, in cases specified by other Articles of this Constitution.

Article 7 According to the instructions of the Holy Koran, (Affairs should be decided upon by consultation) and (Consult with them) the Councils, the National Assembly, the Provincial Council, City Council, local, town and village councils and the like are the organs where decisions should be made for the administration of the affairs of the country. The procedure to establish, limit of the authority, and the definition of the duties of these councils will be specified in this law and other laws emanating from it.

Article 8 In the Islamic Republic of Iran, to encourage others to do good, "A command to do good," and to prohibit others from doing evil are the common duty, and is as well the duty of the Government towards the people, and of the people towards the Government. The conditions, limits and nature of this duty will be determined. Believers, both men and women, are protectors of one another. They encourage what is just and forbid what is evil.

Article 9 In the Islamic Republic of Iran, freedom, independence, unity and the territorial integrity of the country are inseparable from each other and preserving them is the duty of the Government and the people. No individual, or group, or authority shall in the name of freedom harm in any way the political, cultural, economic, or military independence and territorial integrity of Iran, and no authority shall limit legal freedoms, even by enacting laws and regulations on the excuse of preserving the independence and territorial integrity of the country.

Article 10 The family being the fundamental unit of the Islamic society, all laws, regulations, and programs which pertain to it shall facilitate the establishment of the family. They shall safeguard the sanctity of the family and the stability of family relationships, based on Islamic laws and moral concepts. 

Article 11 According to the Koran, This is your nation, which is one nation, and I am the Lord your God, and you shall worship Me all Moslems are members of the same community, and the Government of the Republic of Iran shall base its general policies on the coalition and alliance of the Islamic nations, and it should make continuous efforts in order to realize the political, economic and cultural unity of the Islamic world.

Article 12 The official religion of Iran is Islam, and the sect followed is Jafari Shi'ism and this Article is unalterable. Other Islamic denominations, such as Hanafi, Shafi'i, Maliki, Hanbali and Zaydi, shall enjoy complete respect. The followers of these denominations shall be free to perform their religious rites, in accordance with their own religious laws and according to their religious training and education, as well as in matters relating to their personal affairs such as marriage, divorce, inheritance, wills, etc., and in any litigations regarding such matters, they are formally recognized by the court. In any region in which the followers of any of these denominations are in the majority, the local regulations within the limits of the authority of the councils will be based on the religious laws governing that denomination.

Article 13 The Iranian Zoroastrians, Jews and Christians are the only recognized minorities, who, within the limits of the law, are free to perform their own religious rites, and who, in matters relating to their personal affairs and teachings, may act in accordance with their religious regulations.

Article 14 According to the Koran, God certainly does not forbid you to deal with those and be just to those who did not fight against your religion, and who did not force you out of your home. God loves the just the Islamic Republic of Iran and Moslems shall treat non-Moslems according to the dictates of virtue and Islamic justice, and to honor their human rights. This principle will be applicable only to those who do not become involved in conspiracies and activities which are anti-Islamic or are against the Islamic Republic of Iran.

CHAPTER II The Official Language, Script, History and Language of the Nation

Article 15 The official and common language and script of the people of Iran is Persian. Official documents, correspondence and statements, as well as text books, shall be written in this language and script. However, the use of local and ethnic languages in the press and mass media is allowed. The teaching of ethnic literature in the schools, together with Persian language instruction, is also permitted.

Article 16 The language of the Koran and Islamic studies and instructions are in Arabic, and Arabic totally permeates Persian literature. Therefore, Arabic must be taught in all classes and areas of study from the time that elementary school is completed until graduation from secondary school.

Article 17 The origin of the official calendar of the country is the journey of the prophet of Islam (Hejirat). (May God's blessings be upon him and his 'issue), Hijri solar and Hijri lunar calendars are both recognized. However, the basis upon which governmental organizations function is the Hijri solar calendar. The official day of rest is Friday.

Article 18 The official flag of Iran is green, white and red with the specific emblem of the Islamic Republic and the motto: "Allaho-Akbar." (God is Great)

CHAPTER III Public Rights

Article 19 The people of Iran, regardless of their ethnic, family and tribal origins, shall enjoy equal rights. Color, race, language and the like shall not be cause for privilege.

Article 20 All citizens of the nation, whether men or women, are equally protected by the law. They also enjoy human, political, economic and cultural rights according to Islamic standards.

Article 21 The Government shall guarantee the rights of women in all areas according to Islamic standards and shall provide for the following: 1) The creation of an environment favorable to the personal growth of women, and to the restoration of their material and spiritual rights. 2) Protection of mothers, especially during pregnancy and the child rearing period, as well as the protection of children without guardians. 3) Establishment of courts of jurisdiction for the protection of the family and preservation of the family unit. 4.) Establishment of a special insurance for widows and elderly and destitute women. 5) Granting of guardianship to fit mothers, to protect
those children who have no lawful guardian.

Article 22 The dignity, life, property, rights, shelter and employment of individuals are immune from encroachment except in cases prescribed by law.

Article 23 The interrogation of people regarding their beliefs is forbidden. No person shall be attacked for his beliefs.

Article 24 Publications and the press may express ideas freely, except when they are contrary to Islamic principles, or are detrimental to public rights. The law will provide the details.

Article 25 Opening and reading, and failing to deliver letters, recording and divulging telephone conversations, revealing telegraph and telex messages, exercising censorship, refusing to communicate messages, tapping and such prying is forbidden, unless ordered by law.

Article 26 Parties, groups, political and professional associations, as well as Islamic or recognized minority religious associations are permitted, provided they do not violate principles of independence, freedom, and national unity, or which are contrary to the principles of Islam or the Islamic Republic. No one shall be prevented from participating in these groups or be forced to join any of them.

Article 27 Unarmed assemblies and marches are permitted provided they do not violate the principles of Islam.

Article 28 Every person has the right to choose the profession he wishes, provided it is not contrary to the principles of Islam, to the public interest or to the rights of others. The Government shall provide for every person in accordance with the need of the society for various occupations, the means of employment, and equal opportunities for obtaining such employment.

Article 29 Social insurance, or aid in other forms, as needed in cases of retirement, unemployment, old age, disability, isolation, destitution, accident and misfortune, as well as circumstances which create the need for medical services, treatment and care, etc. is a public right. The Government shall, according to law, provide the aforementioned services and financial support to every individual in the country from public revenues and individual contributions.

Article 30 The Government shall provide everyone with free education and training through high school level, and shall continue to expand facilities for higher education without charge until such time as the country is self-sufficient.

Article 31 A suitable dwelling, according to need, is the right of every Iranian person and family. The 'Government is responsible for laying the groundwork to accomplish this, with first consideration given to those who are in need, in particular villagers and laborers.

Article 32 No one shall be arrested except when permitted by law and in accordance with proper legal procedures. The accused shall be notified immediately of the nature of the accusation against him in written form so that he understands.it. Within a maximum of 24 hours, the preliminary file shall be submitted to the appropriate judicial authorities. Preliminaries to the trial shall be completed without delay. Failure to observe the provision of this article will be punished by law.

Article 33 No one shall be banished from his residence, nor be banned from the place of his choosing, nor forced to reside in a particular location not of his choosing, except as determined by law.

Article 34 Every individual has the absolute right of recourse to competent courts in order to seek justice. Every citizen has the right of access to such courts and no one shall be prevented from referring to a court of justice to which he has legal access.

Article 35 The parties to any litigation shall have the right to legal representation in all courts of justice; if the parties to litigation are not able to select an attorney, legal representation shall be provided for them.

Article 36 A sentence can only be pronounced and conferred by a competent court and in accordance with the law.

Article 37 An individual is presumed innocent unless proven guilty by a competent court.

Article 38 Any form of torture to obtain confession or acquire information is forbidden. No one shall be forced to testify, confess, or take an oath and such testimony, confession and taking of an oath obtained by force is null and void. Failure to observe the provisions of this article shall be punished by law.

Article 39 Violating in any way the dignity and honor of a person who has been seized, detained, imprisoned, or exiled in accordance with the law, is forbidden under any circumstance, and any such violation is punishable.

Article 40 No one may assert his rights in order to harm another, or to infringe upon the public interest.

Article 41 It is the fundamental right of every Iranian to hold Iranian citizenship. The Government shall not deprive any Iranian of his citizenship, unless so requested by the individual, or unless the person becomes the citizen of another country.

Article 42 Foreign nationals may become Iranian citizens as stipulated by law. The citizenship of such individuals may be revoked only when another government grants them citizenship or if they themselves request it.

CHAPTER IV The Economy and Financial Affairs

Article 43 In order to achieve an economically independent society, eradicate poverty and deprivation, and fulfill human needs during the period of major development, the economy of the Islamic Republic of Iran shall be established upon the following principles: 1) To fulfill basic needs for housing, food, clothing, health care, medical care, education and training, and to provide a suitable environment for establishment of the family. 2) To provide everyone with the opportunity and possibility of achieving full employment, and to give employment opportunities to those capable of working, but who do not have the opportunity to do so at present, by means of a cooperative system, by providing interest-free loans and by other legitimate means which will result in neither the concentration of wealth in the hands of; nor its use by particular individuals or groups, nor the transformation of the Government into a monopolistic employer. These measures must be accomplished while keeping in mind the needs which should determine national economic planning at every stage of economic growth. 3) To establish the economic planning of the country in such a way that the structure, content and schedule of work will be such that every individual, in addition to fulfilling his professional responsibilities, will have sufficient opportunity and means to improve himself spiritually, politically, and socially, to participate in the leadership of the country, and to improve his skills and to increase his initiative. 4) To respect the freedom of the individual to choose his own job; no one shall be forced to have a job not of his choosing; no one shall exploit from the labor of others. 5) To forbid the infliction of damage on others, as well as monopolization, speculation, usury, profiteering, and engaging in contracts which are null and void. 6) To forbid waste and extravagance in all forms pertaining to the economy, whether in spending, investment, production, distribution, or services. 7) To profit from science and technology, and to train individuals in skills, to the extent required for the economic development of the country. 8) To prevent foreign control of the national economy. 9) To emphasize agricultural and livestock production as well as industrial production to the extent that it would meet the public need, in order to achieve economic self-sufficiency and release the country from foreign dependency.

Article 44 The economic structure of the Islamic Republic of Iran is composed of three sectors -- governmental, cooperative, and private -- which shall be stabilized by systematic and sound planning. The governmental sector shall consist of all major industries; foreign trade; large mines; banking; insurance; production of power; dams and large irrigation systems; radio and television; postal,telephone and telegram systems; transportation by air, land and sea; railroads; and the like which shall be publicly owned and administered by the Government. The cooperative sector shall include cooperative corporations and means of production and distribution, which shall be formed in the cities and villages in accordance with Islamic principles. The private sector shall include such segments of agriculture, livestock production, industry, trade and services, which shall supplement the economic activities of the governmental and cooperative sectors. Ownership of these three sectors shall be protected by the laws of the Islamic Republic of Iran, provided, however, that such ownership shall be in accordance with other-provisions of this Chapter and further, provided that such ownership shall not extend beyond the limits of Islamic laws, but shall promote economic development. The conditions, limitations and standards of all three aforementioned sectors shall be determined by law.

Article 45 Spoils of war and public property such as wastelands and abandoned lands, seas, lakes, rivers and other public waterways, mountains valleys, forests, bullrush marshes, thickets, unbounded pastures, property to which there is no heir, property whose owner is unknown, and public property which has been reclaimed from usurpers, will be placed in the custody of the Islamic Government, to be used in accordance with the public interest. The details and method of use for each of these shall be prescribed by law.

Article 46 Everyone shall enjoy the benefits of his legitimate business and labor and no one may, because he is the owner (of a particular type of business), deprive others of the opportunity to do the same job.

Article 47 Personal property obtained through legitimate means is respected. The details of this shall be determined by law.

Article 48 No discrimination among the provinces and various regions of the country shall be permitted with regard to the exploitation of natural resources, the utilization of public funds at the provincial level, and the distribution of economic activities. Every region should have the funds and necessary means available to it according to its needs and capacity for development.

Article 49 The Government - shall confiscate wealth derived from usury, extortion, bribery, embezzlement, theft, gambling; and wealth derived from the misuse of religious property, misuse of Government construction contracts and other Government transactions; from the sale of wasteland or barren lands; from the establishment of places of corruption; and from other illegitimate sources. Wealth so obtained shall be returned to its lawful owner, and in the cases where the lawful owner is not known, it shall be remitted to the public fund. This shall be implemented by the Government subsequent to investigations, inquiries and the receipt of legal proof.

Article 50 Protecting the environment in which the present generation lives and in which future generations will develop socially is considered a public responsibility in the Islamic Republic. Therefore, economic activities, and other activities which may pollute the environment or destroy it irrevocably, shall be forbidden.

Article 51 No taxes shall be levied except in accordance with the law. The law shall determine the instances when tax exemptions and reductions may be allowed.

Article 52 The Annual national budget shall be prepared by the Government, as prescribed by law, and shall be submitted to the National Assembly for review and approval. Any alteration in the figures of the budget shall also be subject to the procedures determined by law. 

Article 53 All revenues received by the Government shall be transferred into the accounts of the Treasury and all disbursements shall be within the approved allocations in accordance with the law.

Article 54 The National Auditing Bureau shall be responsible to the National Assembly. Its organizations and operations in Tehran and the provincial centers shall be prescribed by law.

Article 55 The National Auditing Bureau shall inspect and audit all the accounts of the ministries, agencies and governmental corporations, as well as other organizations which in one way or another receive allocations from the country's national budget, as stipulated by law, and shall investigate and audit to ensure that no expenditure shall exceed the approved allocation and that every allocation is used for the purpose specified. The Auditing Bureau shall collect the various accounts, documents, and papers, according to law, and shall submit to the National Assembly a budget settlement for each year, together with its own views. This report must be made available to the public.

CHAPTER V The Right of National Sovereignty and the Powers Derived from It

Article 56 Absolute sovereignty over the world and mankind is God's and He alone has determined the social destiny of human beings. No one shall take away this God-given right from another person or make use of it to serve his special personal or group interests. The Nation shall exercise this God-given right to act according to the manner determined by the following articles.

Article 57 In the Islamic Republic of Iran, the powers arising from the right of national sovereignty are: the legislative power, the judicial power and the executive power. They will be under the jurisdiction of the Mandatory for the Affairs of State and the Imamate. These powers shall always remain independent of each other, and the link among them shall be provided by the President. These powers shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions to be specified in subsequent articles of the Constitution.

Article 58 Legislative power shall be vested in the National Assembly. The Assembly will be composed of the elected representatives of the people, and its resolutions, after passing through certain phases to be specified in subsequent articles, will be communicated to the executive and judicial branches for implementation.

Article 59 In dealing with essential economic, political, social and cultural issues, legislative power may be exercised by holding a referendum and referring the issue directly to the people for judgment. The request for a referendum should be approved by a vote comprising two-thirds of the representatives of the National Assembly.

Article 60 The executive power shall be vested in the President, the Prime Minister, and the Ministers, except in those cases in which, according to this Constitution, it is invested in the Leader.

Article 61 The judicial power shall be vested in the courts of the Department of Justice, and shall be established according to Islamic rules. The judicial power shall resolve disputes, safeguard public rights, and extend and enforce justice, and shall establish punishment according to the Law of God.

CHAPTER VI Legislative Power PART I: The National Assembly

Article 62 The National Assembly shall be composed of representatives of the people, who shall be elected by direct and secret ballot. Condidtions regarding the eligibility of voters and candidates, as well as the circumstances under which the election shall take place, will be prescribed by law.

Article 63 The term of office of the representatives of the National Assembly shall be four years. The election for each term shall be held before the expiration of the preceding term, so that at no given time the country will be without a National Assembly.

Article 64 The number of representatives to the National Assembly shall by two hundred and seventy. There shall be an increase of one representative every decade for each region, provided that there has been an increase in the population of one hundred fifty thousand in that time. The Zoroastrians and Jews shall have one representative each, the Assyrian and Chaldean Christians shall together have one representative, and the Armenian Christians of the South and the North shall each elect one representative to the National Assembly. Should the size of the population of each of the minorities show an increase after ten years, they would be entitled to an additional representative for each additional one hundred and fifty thousand persons. Provisions for holding elections shall be prescribed by law.

Article 65 After elections have been held, the sessions of the National Assembly will he convened officially when two-thirds of the Representatives are present. Draft regulations and bills presented to the National Assembly shall be ratified in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by that body, except in cases where a special quorum is specified by the Constitution. The Rules of Procedure must be approved by a two-thirds majority vote of the representatives present.

Article 66 Matters dealing with the election of the Speaker, Presiding Officers of the National Assembly, the number of Committees, the terms of their incumbency and affairs relating to the hearings, and the rules of behavior of the Assembly shall be determined by the Rules of Procedure.

Article 67 At the first session of the Assembly, the Representatives shall take the oath of allegiance which is as follows and then sign the text of their pledge: "In the name of God, the Merciful, the Beneficent.

"In the presence of the Holy Koran, I hereby swear to God the Almighty, and based upon my honor as a human being, I pledge to be the protector of the sanctity of Islam, and the guardian of the fruits of the Islamic Revolution of the people of Iran, and of the foundations of the Islamic. Republic; to guard the property entrusted to me by the nation as a just trustee; to observe honesty and piety while performing my duties as a representative; to be always faithful to the independence and development of the country, preservation of the rights of the people, and to render my services to the people of the country; to defend the Constitution, and uphold the independence of the country, the freedom of the people, and the interests of the people in thought, word and deed." The representatives of the religious minorities will take the oath of allegiance on the basis of their own Holy Books. The representatives not present at the first session shall take the oath of allegiance at the first session they attend.

Article 68 In the event of the military occupation of the country in time of war, elections throughout the country or in parts thereof may be suspended for a specified period of time, provided that such suspension has been proposed by the President and approved by a three-fourths majority of the representatives and by the Council of Guardians. In case no new National Assembly is convened, the old Assembly will continue its work as before.

Article 69 The sessions of the National Assembly shall be conducted publicly and a full report of the proceedings shall be made public by radio and the official gazette. In case of emergency, as required by considerations of national security, at the request of the Prime Minister, one of the Ministers, or ten representatives, the National Assembly will conduct its business in private. Those decisions made at private sessions shall be applicable only when adopted by a three-fourths majority of the representatives in the presence of the Council of Guardians. The reports and decisions of those private sessions shall be made available to the public when the necessity for secrecy has been removed.

Article 70 The President, the Prime Minister, and the Ministers will be authorized to attend the sessions of the National Assembly collectively or individually. They may also have their aids and advisors accompany them. If deemed necessary by the representatives, the President, the Prime Minister and the Ministers shall be present at the Assembly and may request permission to make statements. The invitation extended to the President to be present at the Assembly should be approved by a majority of the representatives.

Part 2: Powers and Authority of the National Assembly

Article 71 The National Assembly is empowered to enact laws concerning all issues within the limits set down in the Constitution.

Article 72 The National Assembly is not empowered to enact laws which contradict the principles and commandments of the official religion of the country, or the Constitution. The Council of Guardians shall determine this in accordance with Article 96.

Article 73 The interpretation and explanation of ordinary laws is within the jurisdiction of the National Assembly. This article shall not prevent judges from interpreting the law in pursuance of their duties as arbitrators. -41-


Article 74 Bills shall be submitted to the National Assembly after having been approved by the Council of Ministers. Legal proposals may be brought up for discussion at the National Assembly providing they have the support of 15 representatives.

Article 75 Legal plans, proposals and amendments presented by the representatives in connection with bills that would result in the reduction of public income or increase of public expenses, can be brought up for discussion at the National Assembly provided they contain ways and means of compensating for the loss of revenue or secure funds to cover new expenses.

Article 76 The National Assembly is empowered to investigate and to look into all the affairs of the country.

Article 77 International treaties, accords, contracts and pacts must be approved by the National Assembly.

Article 78 Any alteration of the borders and frontiers is prohibited, with the exception of minor adjustments which are compatible with the interests of the country, and which are made on the condition that they are not of a unilateral nature or detrimental to the independence and territorial integrity of the country. Such alterations must be approved by four-fifths of the representatives in the National Assembly.

Article 79 Imposition of martial law is prohibited. In time of war and in cases of forcemajeure the Government will be temporarily empowered to establish necessary restrictions with the approval of the National Assembly. In no case may their duration exceed 30 days. Should the circumstances requiring the restrictions continue to exist, the Government shall obtain a new authorization from the Assembly.

Article 80 The receiving and granting of loans or aid, domestic and foreign, by the Government, shall be done with the approval of the National Assembly.

Article 81 Granting concessions to foreigners for establishing corporations and institutions in the fields of commerce, industry, agriculture, mining and service, is absolutely prohibited.

Article 82 The employment of foreign experts by the Government is prohibited, unless deemed necessary, in which case the approval of the National Assembly is required. 

Article 83 Buildings and Government properties considered to be part of the national heritage are not transferable to others, except with the approval of the National Assembly, provided that a property is not of unique importance.

Article 84 Every representative is responsible to the entire nation, and is empowered to express his views in connection with all domestic and foreign issues.

Article 85 Membership in the Assembly is vested in the person of the representative, and cannot be transferred to another person. The Assembly cannot delegate the authority to enact laws to another person or body. In case of necessity it can delegate its power to enact certain laws to its own committees in accordance with Article 72. In such cases those laws will be implemented on a tentative basis during a period of time determined by the Assembly; final approval of such laws will rest with the National Assembly.

Article. 86 While performing their duties as representatives, the members of the Assembly shall be completely free to express their views or to vote, and they will not be liable to prosecution or arrest because of the views expressed or votes cast while performing their duties as representatives.


Article 87 The Council of Ministers, after its creation and introduction to the Assembly, must obtain a vote of confidence from the Assembly before it may take any official action; when it faces difficult and controversial issues, it may seek a vote of confidence from the Assembly.

Article 88 Whenever a representative asks a question relating to the duties of a minister, the minister shall be present at the Assembly and answer the question. The reply should be given in a period not exceeding 10 days, unless there is a valid reason for delay, which is accepted by the Assembly.

Article 89 Representatives of the Assembly can in cases deemed necessary impeach the Council of Ministers or any minister of the Council. Impeachment can be proposed in the Assembly if ten of the representatives demand it in writing. Either the impeached Council of Ministers, or the impeached minister, must be present in the Assembly ten days after the call for impeachment, and must answer the impeachment and must seek a vote of confidence from the Assembly. If the Council of Ministers or the minister in question is not present to reply to the impeachment, then the representatives who have proposed it will explain it. If the Assembly deems it appropriate, it will cast a vote of no confidence in the impeached Council of Ministers or the minister. If the Assembly arrives at a vote of no confidence, then the Council of Ministers or the minister will be dismissed. In both cases, an impeached Prime Minister or minister cannot be a member of the Council of Ministers that would be formed immediately after that.

Article 90 Anyone who has a complaint about the way in which the National Assembly, the Executive Power, or the Judicial Power operate may, in writing, submit his complaint to the Assembly. The Assembly shall investigate these complaints and respond to them in a satisfactory manner. If the complaint is related to the Executive or Judicial Power, the Assembly shall demand an investigation and obtain a satisfactory answer from these powers, and announce the results in due time. In cases where the complaint is related to the public, the result should be announced to the public.

Article 91 For the purpose of safeguarding the principles of Islam and the Constitution and to avoid any conflict between these principles and the laws of the Assembly, a Council of Guardians will be formed consisting of : 1) Six members of the clergy who are just, are knowledgeable in Islamic jurisprudence, and aware of the needs of the times. The selection of these persons will be made by the Leader of Council of Guardians. 2) Six lawyers from various branches of law, from among Moslem lawyers, who have been introduced to the National Assembly by the Supreme Council fo the Judiciary. Their selection must be confirmed by the Assembly.

Article 92 The members of the Council of Guardians shall be elected for a term of six years,.but three years from the initial elections for the Council, half of the members shall be changed and new members will be elected in their place by means of a lottery.

Article 93 The National Assembly has no legal authority without the presence of the Council of Guardians, except for the approval of the representatives and the confirmation of the six lawyers as members of the Council of Guardians.

Article 94 All legislation passed by the National Assembly shall be sent to the Council of Guardians. The Council of Guardians shall, within ten days of the receipt of such legislation, examine it from the perspective of its adherence to Islamic and Constitutional principles, and in case of conflict, such legislation will be returned to the Assembly for revision. Otherwise, such legislation shall be considered enforceable.

Article 95 If the Council of Guardians decides that ten days is not sufficient to examine the legislation and express its final opinion, it may request a 10-day extension, stating its reasons for such a request. Article 96 The majority of the members of the clergy of the Council of Guardians decides whether legislation passed by the National Assembly conflicts with Islamic principles, and the majority of all the members of the Council of Guardians decides whether the legislation conflicts with Constitutional principles. Article 97 To expedite their work, members of the Council of Guardians may attend the Assembly and listen to the deliberations of the members on bills or draft legislation. When urgent legislation or bills are placed before the Assembly, they must attend that session and express their opinions.

Article 98 The Council of Guardians is responsible for interpreting the Constitutional law. This interpretation is given on the basis of a majority decision by three-fourths of its members.

Article 99 The Council of Guardians is responsible for supervising the Presidential election, the elections of the National Assembly, and referendums. 


CHAPTER VII The Councils

Article 100 In order to further social, economic, development, public health, cultural, and educational programs, as well as programs relating to other welfare matters, through the cooperation of the public and in keeping with local circumstances for administering these affairs, every village, town, city, township, or province will elect from its citizens members for councils for the village, town, city, township, and province. The qualifications of the electors and those who are elected, the limits of their duties and privileges, the manner of their election, and the supervision of the said councils and their administrative rank should be based upon the principles of national unity, territorial integrity, of the Islamic Republic, and control by the central government as determined by law.

Article 101 To prevent discrimination and encourage cooperation in planning development and welfare programs for the provinces and to supervise coordination of these programs, a Supreme Council of the Provinces will be organized composed of representatives from each province. The organization and duties of this council are prescribed by law.

Article 102 The Supreme Council of the Provinces may prepare plans within the limits of its duties and submit them to the National Assembly, either directly or thorugh the Administration. These plans will then be studied by the Assembly.

Article 103 The governors, mayors of cities and towns, and other civil authorities, shall abide by the decisions of the Council, as long as these fall within the limits of the Council's powers.

Article 104 In order to safeguard Islamic justice in the preparation of programs, and in the coordination of progress in the affairs of industrial and agricultural production units, councils composed of representatives of workers, farmers, and other employees and managers will be organized to operate in educational, administrative, and service units. These councils will thus be comprised of representatives of the members of these units. The manner of organizing these councils and the limits of their duties and privileges shall be prescribed by law.

Article 105 The decisions of the councils shall not conflict with the standards of Islam or the laws of the country.

Article 106 The councils may not be dissolved unless they deviate from their legal duties. The authority which determines if such deviation has taken place, the manner in which the councils are dissolved, and the method by which they are reconstituted will be determined by law. Should a council object to its dissolution, a complaint will be submitted to the competent court, and the court shall give priority to the investigation of such a complaint.

CHAPTER VIII The Leader or the Council of Leaders

Article 107 Whenever a qualified member of the Islamic clergy,as mentioned in Article 5 of the Constitution,is recognized and accepted by a decisive majority of the people as model and leader -as has occurred in the case of the great model and leader of the Revolution, Ayatollah Imam Khomeini -- this leader is responsible for the mandate for the affairs of state and bears all responsibilities derived from it. Otherwise, experts elected by the people shall investigate all those qualified as model and leader, and consult among themselves regarding the qualifications of these persons. Whenever a candidate who has outstanding characteristics for leadership is found, he will be presented as leader of the people. Otherwise, three to five candidates who fill the conditions for leadership will be appointed members of the Council of Leaders and presented to the people.

Article 108 The law regarding the number and qualifications of experts, the procedure followed for their election, the rules of procedure of their sessions and the fixing of their terms must be prepared by the members of the clergy of the first Council of Guardians, approved by a majority of them, and finally approved by the Leader of the Revolution. Thereafter, amendment and revision of this law is within the competence of the Council of Experts.

Article 109 The qualifications and attributes of the Leader or members of the Council of Leaders are: 1) The necessary competence in theology and sufficient piety to deliver a formal opinion, or the ability to attract followers. 2) Sufficient political and social insight, courage, strength, and potential for leadership.

Article 110 The duties and powers of the Leader are: 1) To appoint the members of the clergy on the Council of Guardians; 2) To appoint the highest judicial authorities of the country; 3) To command all the armed forces as follows: a. To appoint and dismiss the Chief of Staff; b. To appoint and dismiss the Commander-in-Chief of the Revolutionary Corps; c. To organize the Supreme Council for National Defense which will be composed of the following 
seven members: --President of the Republic --Prime Minister --Minister of Defense --Chief of Staff --The Commander-in-Chief of the Revolutionary Corps --Two advisers appointed by the Leader d. To appoint the Commanders-in-Chief of the three Armed Forces on the recommendation of the Supreme Council for National Defense; e. To declare war and mobilize the Armed Forces on the recommendation of the Supreme Council for National Defense. 4) To confirm the appointment of the President after he has been elected by the people, the competence and qualifications specified in the Constitution of candidates for the Presidency shall be confirmed by the Council of Guardians before the election. However, for the first. term of office approval of the candidates for the Presidency before the election will' be given by the Leader. 5) To dismiss the President of the Republic in the interests of the country after a judgment is issued by the Supreme Court that he has violated his legal duties, or when the National Assembly expresses the opinion that he is politically incompetent. 6) To pardon or reduce the sentences of convicts within the framework of Islamic principles on the recommendation of the Supreme Court.

Article 111 Whenever the Leader or any member of the Council of Leaders becomes incapable of performing his legal duties or no longer possesses any of the qualifications specified in Article 108, he shall be dismissed. The judgment regarding the necessity for such an action shall be made by the Council of Experts. Regulations for the taking of such an action will be established at the first session of the Council of Experts.

Article 112 The Leader or members of the Council of Leaders and all other citizens of the country are equal before the law.

CHAPTER IX Executive Power Part I: The Presidency

Article 113 The President holds the highest office in the country next to the office of the Leader. He is responsible for enforcing the Constitution of the country and for determining the relationships among the three powers. He is the Chief Executive except in those matters for which the Leader is responsible.

Article 114 The President is elected for a 4-year term by the direct vote of the people. He can be re-elected for only one additional term. 

Article 115 The President must be elected from among statesmen of political and religious distinction. He must be of Iranian origin, be an Iranian citizen, be efficient and prudent, of good background, trustworthy, a pious believer in and faithful to the principles of the Islamic Republic of Iran and in the official religion of the country.

Article 116 Candidates for the Presidency must officially announce their candidacy before the beginning of the election. Procedures for the election of the President-will be determined by law.

Article 117 The President will be elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast in the election, but if in the first round of the election none of the candidates can secure such an absolute majority, a second round of elections will be held on the following Friday. Only the two candidates who secured the greatest number of votes will be allowed to participate in the second round, the two candidates who secured the next largest number of votes in the first round will be introduced for this second round of elections.

Article 118 According to Article 99, the Council of Guardians will be responsible for supervising the election of the President. But prior to the initial creation of the Council of Guardians, the responsibility lies with a supervisory council specified by law.

Article 119 The election of the new President must be carried out at least one month before the end of the term of the incumbent President. In the interim period between the election of the new President and the conclusion of the term of the incumbent, the incumbent will carry out the duties of the Presidential office.

Article 120 If one of the eligible candidates dies in the 10 days prior to the election, the elections will be delayed for 2 weeks. If between the first and the second round of the election, one of the two candidates with the most votes dies, the second round of the election will be postponed for 2 weeks.

Article 121 At a special session of the National Assembly, attended by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the members of the Council of Guardians, the President will take and sign the oath of office which is as follows: "In the name of God, the Merciful, the Beneficent. "I, as the President, swear on the Holy Koran and before the Iranian nation, as God is my witness, that I will be the guardian of the official religion,of the principles of the Islamic Republic and of the Constitution of the country. I shall perform the duties I have undertaken to the best of my ability. I will dedicate myself to the development of the country, promote religion and morality, and uphold right and justice. I shall refrain from being self-indulgent and willful, defend freedom, respect the people and the rights of the nation recognized by the Constitution. I will not refrain from taking any step necessary to protect the frontiers and the political, economic, and cultural independence of the country. With the help of God, and following the example of the Prophet of Islam and the Holy Imams and their issue, may the peace of God be with them, as a devout and trustworthy guardian, I will guard the power entrusted to me by the people with all my heart, and I shall entrust that power to the men elected after me by the people."

Article 122 The President is responsible to the people within the limitation of his authority and responsibilities. Failure to fulfill his responsibilities will result in an investigation, and the procedure for such an investigation shall be determined by law.

Article 123 The President shall sign the laws which have been passed by the Assembly or the results of legally conducted referendums which have been presented to him. He should then put them in the hands of the administrators responsible for enforcing them. 

Article 129 The bestowal of national medals is the responsibility of the President.

Article 130 In the case of absence of the President due to illness or other reasons, an Acting Council of the Presidency will be formed. This Council will consist of the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, and it will carry out the duties of the President, provided, however, that the absence of the President will be no longer than 2 months. Also, in case of dismissal, or when the term of office of the previous President has been completed, but because of certain obstacles the new President has not been elected, this Council will be responsible for carrying out the duties of the President.

Article 131 In case of death, or of absence or illness lasting more than 2 months or for any other reason , this Council shall

make arrangements so that a new President may be elected within the next 50 days. Within this period, the Temporary Council shall assume the duties and authority of the President, except for those relating to referendums.

Article 132 While the duties of the President are being performed by the Temporary Council, the Government cannot be impeached, nor can it receive a vote of no confidence, nor can any steps be taken for the revision of the Constitution.

Part 2: The Prime Minister and Ministers

Article 133 The Ministers will be appointed on the recommendation of the Prime Minister and with the approval of the President. They shall then be introduced to the National Assembly for a vote of confirmation. The number of ministers and their authority shall be determined by law.

Article 134 The Prime Minister shall head the Council of Ministers and supervise the work of the ministers, with due consideration, and he will coordinate Government decisions. With the cooperation of the ministers, he will determine government programs and policies and enforce the laws. The Prime Minister is responsible to the Assembly for the actions of the Council of Ministers.

Article 135 The Prime Minister shall remain in office as long as he enjoys the confidence of the Assembly. The letter of resignation of the Administration should be handed to the President. The Prime Minister shall continue with his duties until a new Administration is formed. -60-


Article 136 The Prime Minister may not dismiss a minister, or appoint a new one without the approval of the President. A vote of confirmation of the new minister must be obtained from the National Assembly. If half of the members of the Council of Ministers are changed after a vote of confidence has been received from the Assembly, the Government must seek a new vote of confidence from the Assembly.

Article 137 Each minister is responsible to the Assembly regarding those matters which are the responsibility of his ministry, but in matters that have been approved by the Council of Ministers, he will be held responsible for matters relating to the other ministries.

Article 138 In addition to cases where the Council of Ministers or a particular minister is normally empowered to enact administrative regulations for the enforcement of a law, the Council of Ministers is also empowered to issue other decrees or regulations in order to fulfill administrative duties, safeguard the execution of the laws and regulate administrative organizations. Each of the ministers, within the framework of his duties, and with the approval of the Council of Ministers, is empowered to formulate regulations and issue circulars. The content of these regulations shall not conflict with the wording or the spirit of the law.

Article 139 The settlement of disputes related to public and government property, or the referral of such disputes for judicial settlement, is subject to the approval of the Council of Ministers for each case, and the Assembly must be informed Of it. When one of the parties to the dispute is a foreigner, or in cases of national importance, the case must be approved by the Assembly. The definition of national importance shall be determined by law.

Article 140 Investigations of charges levelled against the President, the Prime Minister or the ministers relating to ordinary crimes will be conducted in the public courts of the Ministry of Justice with the prior knowledge of the National Assembly.

Article 141 The President, Prime Minister, Ministers and Government employees shall not hold more than one government job. They are also forbidden to have any other job in organizations all or some of whose capital belongs to the government and to public institutions, nor shall they be a representative to the National Assembly, an attorney, a legal adviser, chairman, managing director or member of the board of directors of various private organizations, except for cooperative associations and organizations of the administration. Teaching positions at universities and research institutes are excepted from this rule. The Prime Minister may, when necessary, be given charge of certain ministries on a temporary basis.

Article 142 The Supreme Court will investigate the assets of the Leader, members of the Council of Leaders, President, Prime Minister, the ministers, and their wives and children before and after holding office, to ensure that they have no illegitimate increase in their assets.

Part 3: The Army and Revolutionary Corps

Article 143 The Army of the Islamic Republic of Iran is responsible for safeguarding the independence, territorial integrity and principles of the Islamic Republic.

Article 144 The Army of the Islamic Republic of Iran shall be an Islamic army. It must be an ideologically-oriented and democratic army and it must accept competent people who will be faithful to the goals of the Islamic revolution and will be self-sacrificing in the attainment of those goals. 


Article 145 No foreign national shall be accepted for membership in the Army or security forces.

Article 146 Establishment of any kind of foreign military bases in the country shall be forbidden, even though those bases are to be used for peaceful purposes.

Article 147 The Government in time of peace must utilize the personnel and technical equipment of the military for relief operations, educational and productive purposes and the Crusade for Reconstruction. This should be done with total observance of the principles of Islamic justice and only to the extent that it does not harm the combat readiness of the military.

Article 148 Misuse of special privileges accorded to the military, or of military equipment, and use of military personnel as orderlies, chauffeurs and for other such tasks is prohibited.

Article 149 Promotion and demotion of military personnel shall be done according to the law.

Article 150 The Islamic Revolutionary Corps that was formed in the first days of the victory of this revolution shall remain active in order to continue its role as the guardian of the revolution and of the fruits of its victory. The definition of the responsibilities of this Corps and the scope of its authority in relation to the responsibilities and the scope of authority of other armed forces shall be determined by law, with emphasis on cooperation and brotherly harmony.

Article 151 According to the Holy Koran, "Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including steeds of war to strike terror into the hearts of the enemies of God, and your enemies, and others besides, whom you may not know, but whom God does know." The Government shall provide military training programs and facilities for all the people of the country, in accordance with Islamic principles, in order to enable the people to defend the country and the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran with arms. However, possession of firearms must be by permission of the authorities.

CHAPTER X Foreign Policy

Article 152 The foreign policy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is founded on the principles of refusal to dominate, or be dominated, safeguarding the complete independence and territorial integrity of the country, defense of the rights of all Moslems, adoption of the policy of nonalignment with respect to the dominating powers and the maintenance of mutual peaceful relationships with nonbelligerent nations.

Article 153 The signing of any type of agreement that will result in the domination by a foreign power of the natural and economic resources, or of the culture, the army, or of the country is forbidden.

Article 154 The Islamic Republic of Iran regards the universal happiness of mankind to be its final goal, and recognizes the independence, freedom and rule of right and justice for all the people of the world. Therefore, while practicing a policy of complete non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations, it will support the just struggle of the oppressed against their oppressors anywhere in the world.

Article 155 The Islamic Republic of Iran shall give political asylum to anyone who requests it, except in cases where such a person is considered a traitor and criminal, according the the laws of Iran.

CHAPTER XI Judicial Power

Article 156 Judicial power is an independent power which shall support individual and social rights and shall be responsible for ensuring justice. It performs the following functions: 1) To investigate matters concerning petitions, violations of law, complaints, and to render judgment concerning the above mentioned matters; to resolve disputes between the parties to litigation, to settle conflicts, and to decide on and undertake appropriate steps on probate matters, details of which shall be regulated by law. 2) To restore public rights and ensure justice and legitimate freedoms. 3) To supervise the just enforcement of laws. 4) To investigate crime, prosecute, punish, and rehabilitate the criminal, and to enforce the prescriptions and regulations of the Islamic Penal Code. 5) To take appropriate steps to prevent crime and reform criminals.

Article 157 A council, called The Supreme Council of the Judiciary, shall be formed to carry out the responsibilities of the Judiciary. This Council is considered to be the highest level of judicial authority and its duties are as follows: 1) To establish necessary organizations in the Ministry of Justice commensurate with the responsibilities specified in Article 156. 2) To prepare bills relating to judicial matters that are compatible with the principles of an Islamic republic. 3) To employ and dismiss, as well as to appoint, in accordance with the law, equitable and worthy judges, to assign the location of their service, to promote them and the like, and any other decision of an administrative nature in accordance with the law.

Article 158 The Supreme Council members: 1) Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 2) Attorney General 3) Three learned and equitable judges, chosen by the judges of the country. According to the law, the members of this Council shall be elected for a term of 5 years, and their re-election is permitted. The qualifications for the electors and the elected will be determined by law.

Article 159 The Ministry of Justice is the authority to which complaints and petitions shall be addressed. The establishment of courts and the limits of their jurisdiction shall be determined by law.

Article 160 The Minister of Justice shall be responsible for all matters regarding the relationship among the Judiciary, the Executive and the Legislative Powers. He shall be chosen from among candidates proposed to the Prime Minister by the Supreme Council of the Judiciary.

Article 161 The Supreme Court of the Country shall be established to ensure the proper enforcement of laws in the courts, to establish precedents, and to fulfill the responsibilities that have been given to it according to the law, based on standards determined by the Supreme Council of the Judiciary.

Article 162 The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the Attorney General must be equitable, learned men and must have knowledge of judicial matters. The Leader, in consultation with the Supreme Court judges, will appoint them to those offices for a five-year term. 

Article 163 The qualifications for judges shall be determined by law in accordance with the standards of religious jurisprudence.

Article 164 A judge shall not be, temporarily or permanently, removed from the position that he holds without a trial and proof of any crime or violations which are considered grounds for dismissal, nor can his place of duty or his job be changed unless it is in the interest of society, and unless it is carried out with the unanimous approval of the members of the Supreme Council of the Judiciary. The tour of duty of judges will be rotated according to basic rules determined by law.

Article 165 Trials shall be open and the public shall be allowed to attend unless the court decides that an open trial is incompatible with public morals or public order, or in private litigation when both parties request that the trial not be open.

Article 166 Decisions of the court must be rational and supported by law and by those principles based on which the decision has been rendered.

Article 167 A judge shall try to base his decisions on codified laws, and if he can not do so, on the basis of statutory provisions, then he shall render judgment based upon reputable Islamic sources or precedents. He cannot avoid investigation of the dispute and refrain from passing judgment where the law is silent, or on the pretext of deficiency, non-applicability, or conflict of the codified laws.

Article 168 Investigations of political crimes and crimes of the press are to be held in the courts of the Ministry of Justice, openly and with judge and jury. The definition of a political crime, the manner in which the jury will be selected, their qualifications and the limits of their authority shall be determined by law, based upon Islamic principles.

Article 169 An act or omission cannot be considered a crime if the date on which the act or omission took place preceded the date on which the law came into force.

Article 170 The judges of the court shall not enforce governmental decrees and regulations that are contrary to Islamic laws and regulations and those that exceed the limitations of the Executive Power. Every person may request the Executive Tribunal to revoke such regulations.

Article 171 If an individual suffers any material or moral damage due to the fault or mistake of a judge regarding questions of fact or law, or in rendering judgment in a particular case, in the case of bad faith, the judge shall be held liable in accordance with Islamic principles. Otherwise, the Government will provide compensation to the person who has suffered this loss of dignity, and in either case, shall have it restored.

Article 172 For investigation of crimes against the rules and regulations of the military or security forces, committed by members of the Army, Gendarmery, Police Force or Islamic Revolutionary Corps, a military tribunal will be formed in accordance with the law. But if these individuals commit common crimes or crimes as law enforcement officers, then their crimes shall be investigated in public courts. The Office of the Judge Advocate and military courts shall fall under the authority of the Judicial Power of the country and are governed by articles related to this Power.

Article 173 With a view to investigating the complaints, petitions, and objections of the people concerning government officials, agencies, regulations and the administration of public rights, a tribunal called The Tribunal of Administrative Justice shall be created under the supervison of the Supreme Judicial Council.

The jurisdiction and the procedures followed by this tribunal shall be defined by law.

Article 174 Based upon the authority of the Judicial Power to ensure the proper conduct of affairs and the proper enforcement of the law in governmental agencies, an organization called the "National Organization of Investigation" shall be created under the supervision of the Supreme Judicial Council. The duties and jurisdiction of this organization shall be defined by law.

CHAPTER XII Mass Media

Article 175 In the mass media (radio and television), freedom of publication and expression according to Islamic principles shall be guaranteed. These media will be under the common supervision of the Judicial (the Supreme Judicial Council), Legislative and Executive Powers. The details of such supervision shall be defined by law.

The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran -- which was formulated in 12 Chapters comprised of 175 Articles -- was approved by two-thirds of the total membership of the Assembly for the Final Review of the Constitution, and was finally ratified on the 24th day of the month of Aban of the Solar Year 1358, corresponding to the 24th day of the month of Zel-Haji of the Lunar Year 1399.


