CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF TH WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

The KYRGHYZ REPUBLIC(KYRGYZSTAN)
Introduction by J. CHRISTOPHER LEWISTranslation by VLADIMIR I. LAFITSKY

RELAS94-5 Issued July 1994

Oceana Publications, Inc.. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains material © Copyright by The Philadelphia Constitution Foundation, reproduced with permission. For copyright and permission statements in Constitutions of the Countries of the World generally, please see Overall Table of Contents. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 C Copyright 1994 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

CONSTITUTION OF THE KYRGHYZ REPUBLIC
Adopted on May 5, 1993 at The Session of Supreme Soviet of the Kyryz Republic of the 12th Convocation
Bishkek - 1993

1

Preamble Chapter I - The Kyrghyz Republic Section 1. General principles Section 2. The structure and functioning of the State Chapter II - Citizens Section 1. Citizenship Section 2. The rights and freedoms of an individual Section 3. The rights and duties of a citizen Chapter III - President Section 1. The election of the President Section 2. The powers of the President Chapter IV - The Jogorku Kenesh Section 1. The election of the Jogorku Kenesh Section 2. The powers of the Jogorku Kenesh Section 3. The legislative activity of the Jogorku Kenesh Chapter V - The Executive Power Section 1. Government Section 2. Local state administration Chapter VI - Courts and justice Chapter VII - Local self -government Chapter VIII - The procedure for amendments and additions to the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic

3

We, People of the Kyrghyz Republic, in order to secure national revival of the Kyrghyz, the defence and development of interests of representatives of all nationalities who form together with the Kyrghyz the People of Kyrghyzstan, guided by the ancestors' precepts to live in unity, peace and concord; to confirm our adherence to human rights and freedoms and the idea of national statehood; full of determination to develop the economy, political and legal institutions, culture in order to ensure worthy standards of living for everybody; announcing our adherence to universal human principles, and moral values of national traditions; full of desire to establish ourselves among the peoples of the world as a free and democratic civil society; in our role as authorized representatives do enact the present Constitution.

5

CHAPTER I THE KYRGHYZ REPUBLIC SECTION 1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES Article 1 The Kyrghyz Republic (Kyrghyzstan) shall be a sovereign unitary 1. democratic republic created on the basis of a legal secular state. Sovereignty of the Kyrghyz Republic shall not be limited and shall 2. extend throughout its territory. People of the Kyrghyz Republic shall bear sovereignty and shall be 3. the only source of the State Power in the Kyrghyz Republic. People of the Kyrghyz Republic shall exercise their power directly 4. and through the system of state bodies on the basis of this Constitution and laws of the Kyrghyz Republic. Only the Jogorku Kenesh and the President of the Kyrghyz Republic elected by the People of Kyrghyzstan shall have the right to act on behalf of the People of Kyrghyzstan. Laws and other issues of State life, in order to reveal the will of the 5. People, may be put to a referendum. The basis and procedure of holding a referendum shall be established by the Constitutional Act. Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall elect President, Deputies of 6. the Jogorku Kenesh and their representatives to bodies of local self Government. Elections shall be free and shall be held on the basis of universal equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. To participate in the election a citizen must have attained the age of 18. Article 2 The State and its bodies shall serve the whole society, and not its 1. particular group. No group of people, no organization, nor any person shall have the 2. right to assume Power in the State. The usurpation of State Power shall be a felony. Article 3 The territory of the Kyrghyz Republic within its present boundaries 1. shall be inviolable and indivisible.

7

2. The territory of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be divided to administrative territorial units established by law for the purposes of the organization of state government. Article 4. 1. In the Kyrghyz Republic there may be state and private property.

The Kyrghyz Republic shall guarantee the diversity of property types and their equal protection by law. 2. In the Kyrghyz Republic the land, its subsoil, water, air space, fauna and flora - all natural resources shall be the property of the State. 3. Plots of land, in the procedure and size provided by law of the Kyrghyz Republic may be given to citizens and their associations for private possession. The purchase and sale of land shall not be allowed. 4. The Kyrghyz Republic shall defend the right of its citizens and legal entities to own property, and shall defend citizens' and governmental property located on the territories of other states. Article 5 1. The official language of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be the Kyrghyz language. 2. The Kyrghyz Republic shall guarantee preservation, equal and free development and functioning of the Russian language and all other languages which are used by the population of the republic. 3. Infringement of the citizens' rights on the ground of absence off knowledge and command of the official language shall not be allowed. Article 6 The state symbols of the Kyrghyz Republic are the State Flag, Emblem and Anthem. The capital of the Kyrghyz Republic is the city of Bishkek. SECTION 2 THE STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY OF THE STATE Article 7 1.	 State Power in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be based on the following principles: — the division of Power into legislative, executive and judicial branches;

8

— nation-wide election of the head of the State - President of the Kyrghyz Republic, who shall be the guarantor of the stability of the Constitution and unity of the State; — the division between national power and local self-government. State power in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be vested in and 2	 exercised by: The Legislative Power - by the Jogorku Kenesh; The Executive Power - by the Government and local state administration; The Judicial Power - by the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, Courts and judges of the system of justice. Bodies of Legislative, Executive and Judicial Power shall function independently and in cooperation with each other. They shall have no right exceed their powers established by the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 8 1. Political parties, trade unions and other public associations may be organized in the Kyrghyz Republic on the bases of free will and unity of interests. The State shall guarantee the rights and lawful interests of public
associations.

Political parties may participate in state affairs only in the following forms: to nominate their candidates for the election to the Jogorku Kenesh, state posts and to bodies of local self-government; to form factions in representative bodies. Religion, all sects shall be separated from the State. 4.	 The following shall not be allowed in the Kyrghyz Republic: — the amalgamation of State and Party institutions, as well as subordination of State activity to party programs and decisions; — the formation of activity of party organizations in state institutions and establishments. Officials shall have the right to carry out their party activities outside their working hours; membership and activity in support of any political party by military men, officials in the organs of internal affairs, national security, justice, procuracy and courts; - organization of political parties on religious grounds. Religious organizations shall not pursue political aims and tasks; — interference by members of religious organizations and sects with the activity of state bodies. — the activity of political parties of foreign countries.

9

Article 9 1. The Kyrghyz Republic shall not pursue the policy of expansion, aggression and claim to territorial extent performed by means of military force. It shall reject any kind of militarization of national life, subordination of the government or its activity for the purposes of war. Military forces of Kyrghyzstan shall be organized in accordance with the principles of self defense and defensive sufficiency. 2. The right to go to war shall not be acknowledged except in cases of aggression against Kyrghyzstan or other countries coming under the obligations to collective defense. The permission in each case when a military unit crosses over the borders of Kyrghyzstan must be received in the form of a decision of the Jogorku Kenesh approved not less than 2/3 of the total number of Deputies. The use of military force for the solution of internal political issues 3. shall be prohibited. Military personnel may be called upon in case of natural disasters and in other similar cases prescribed directly by law. The Kyrghyz Republic shall seek universal and just peace, mutual 4. cooperation, solution of global and regional problems by peaceful measures, and shall observe universally recognized principles of International Law. Actions aimed at disturbing the peaceful communal life of the people, propaganda and encouragement of ethnic clashes shall be unconstitutional. Article 10 A state of emergency in Kyrghyzstan may be imposed only in case 1. of natural disaster, direct threat to the Constitutional structure, breach of public order accompanied by violence and menace to human life, as well as under the circumstances and for limited periods, as provided for in the Constitutional Law. A state of emergency throughout the territory of the Kyrghyz 2. Republic may be imposed only by the Jogorku Kenesh. A state of, emergency may be imposed by the President in limited locations under circumstances requiring immediate action; the President shall inform the Jogorku Kenesh the same day. The Jogorku Kenesh shall confirm the act of the President within not more than three days. If such a confirmation has not been made within the indicated time, the state of emergency shall be annulled. Martial law in the Kyrghyz Republic may be introduced by the 3. Jogorku Kenesh only in case of aggression against the Kyrghyz Republic Recess of a session of the Jogorku Kenesh shall not be allowed 4. during a state of emergency and martial law. In those cases when the 10

Jogorku Kenesh is not in session and a state of emergency has been imposed by the President, the Jogorku Kenesh shall call a special session not later than the day following the introduction of the state of emergency. 5. Referenda, elections to state bodies as well as any changes in the structure, functions and power of state bodies established by the Constitution shall not be allowed during a state of emergency and martial law. Article 11 1. The state budget of the Kyrghyz Republic shall consist of the republican budget and local budgets, comprising all expenditures and revenues of the state. The republican budget shall be approved by the Jogorku Kenesh upon presentation by the Government. 2. Revenue in the republican budget shall be derived from taxes established by law, other liabilities, income from state property and other incomes. A single system of taxation shall function in the territory of the Kyrghyz Republic. The right to impose taxes shall belong to the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrghyz Republic. 3. The Jogorku Kenesh shall have the right to establish extra-budgetary dedicated financial funds. The sources of income for these extra-budgetary funds may be attracted assets. The report on the execution of the republican budget and extra4. budgetary funds shall be approved by the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 12 1. The Constitution shall have supreme legal force and direct effect in the Kyrghyz Republic. Laws and other normative acts shall be adopted on basis of the 2. Constitution. International treaties and other norms of international law which 3. have been ratified by the Kyrghyz Republic shall be a component and directly applicable part of legislation of the Kyrghyz Republic.

11

CHAPTER II CITIZENS SECTION 1 CITIZENSHIP Article 13 The belonging of a citizen to the Kyrghyz Republic and his status 1. shall be determined by citizenship. A citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic shall observe the Constitution and laws of the republic, and shall respect the rights, freedoms, honour and dignity of other people. Citizenship of other countries shall not be recognized for citizens of 2. the Kyrghyz Republic. No citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be deprived of his 3. citizenship or the right to change his citizenship. The Kyrghyz Republic shall guarantee defense and protection of its 4. citizens when outside its territory. Article 14 Every citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic by virtue of his citizenship 1. shall enjoy the rights and perform obligations. Foreign citizens and stateless persons when in Kyrghyzstan shall 2. enjoy the rights and freedoms of citizens and perform duties on the bases, under the terms and in the procedure prescribed by law, international treaties and agreements. SECTION 2 THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF THE INDIVIDUAL Article 15 Dignity of an individual in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be absolute 1. and inviolable. 2. The basic human rights and freedoms shall belong to every person from birth. They shall be recognized as absolute, inalienable and protected by law and the courts from infringement by any other person. All persons in the Kyrghyz Republic are equal before law and the 3. court. No person shall be subject to any kind of discrimination, violation of his rights and freedoms on the ground of ethnic origin, sex, race,

12

nationality, language, religion, political and religious convictions, as well as under other conditions and circumstances of private or social nature. Human rights and freedoms are valid in the Kyrghyz Republic. 4. Such rights shall determine the meaning, content and application of the laws; shall be respected by the legislative and executive branches and local self-government, and shall be guaranteed by the judicial system. In the Kyrghyz Republic, the State shall encourage folk customs 5. and traditions which do not contravene the Constitution and human rights and freedoms. Article 16 In the Kyrghyz Republic the basic human rights and freedoms shall 1. be recognized and guaranteed in accordance with universally-accepted norms and principles of international law, international treaties and agreements on the issues of human rights which have bee ratified by the Kyrghyz Republic 2. Every person in the Kyrghyz Republic shall enjoy the right:

— to life, physical and moral immunity;
— to personal freedom and security; — to freedom of personal development; — to freedom of conscience, spirit and worships; — to free expression and dissemination of one's thoughts, ideas, opinions freedom of literary, artistic, scientific and technical creative work, freedom of the press, transmission and dissemination of information; — to freedom of movement and freedom to choose one's place of residence throughout the territory of Kyrghyzstan, and the right to travel abroad and return home; — to freedom of assembly; — to associate peacefully without weapons, to hold meetings and demonstrations; — to inviolability of the home; — to freedom and privacy of correspondence; — to dignity, freedom of private life, personal and family secrecy; — to secrecy of post, telephone and telegraphic communications; — to have property, to possess, use and administer it on one's own account; — to economic freedom, free use of ones abilities and property for any type of economic activity; — to freedom of labor, and free choice of ones type of activity and occupation.

be interpreted as negating or infringing upon other universally-recognized human rights and freedoms.

The enumeration of rights and freedoms in the Constitution shall not

13

Article 17 In the Kyrghyz Republic no laws shall be enacted which abolish or 1. infringe on human rights and freedoms. Restrictions on the exercise of rights and freedoms shall be allowed 2. by the Constitution and laws of the Kyrghyz Republic only for the purposes of guaranteeing rights and freedoms of other persons, providing public safety and constitutional order. In such cases, the essence of the constitutional rights and freedoms shall not be effected. Article 18 1. Limitations of physical and moral inviolability shall be allowed only on the basis of law by the decision of a court as punishment for a crime committed. No one may be tortured, subjected to ill-treatment or inhuman degrading punishment. Medical, biological, and physiological experiments on people shall 2. be prohibited without a voluntary agreement properly expressed and confirmed by the person participating in the experiment. No one may be subjected to arrest or detention except on the basis of 3. law. Any actions aimed at imposing responsibility for a crime on a person before the sentence has been passed by the court shall not be allowed, and shall be grounds for material and moral compensation to the victim by the court. Capital punishment may be imposed only in exceptional cases under 4. the sentence of a court. Any person sentenced to capital punishment shall have the right to appeal for pardon. Article 19 Private property in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be recognized and 1. guaranteed as an inalienable human right, as a natural source of one's welfare, business and creative activity, and as a guarantor of one's economic and personal independence. Property shall be inviolable. No person can be deprived of his 2. property, and its deprivation against the will of its owner shall be allowed only by the decision of a court. In the Kyrghyz Republic the right of inheritance shall be guaranteed 3. and protected by law. Article 20 The Kyrghyz Republic may grant political asylum to foreign citizens and stateless persons in response to human rights violations. 14

SECTION 3 THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF A CITIZEN Article 21 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic, and their organizations, shall be 1. allowed to engage in any action or activity, except those prohibited or restricted by the present Constitution and laws of the Kyrghyz Republic. The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms by a citizen of the 2. Kyrghyz Republic shall be inseparable from his duties as are necessary for the security of private and national interest. Article 22 Laws of the Kyrghyz Republic concerning the rights and freedoms of citizens shall be equally applied to all citizens and shall not bestow on anyone privileges and preferences, except those provided by the Constitution and laws for the social protection of citizens. Article 23 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall participate in governing both directly and through their representatives, in the discussion and adoption of laws, decisions of republican and local significance, and they shall have equal access to governmental services. Article 24 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right and duty to defend the Motherland. Citizens shall perform military service within the limits and in the forms established by law. Article 25 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic are obliged to pay taxes and fees in accordance with legislation. Article 26 1. The Family shall be the fundamental unit of society; family, fatherhood, maternity and childhood shall be the subject of concern for the whole society and subject to preferable protection by law; child care and upbringing shall be the natural right and civic duty of the parents. Children are obliged to render help to their parents. The government shall provide material assistance, up-bringing and 2. education for orphans and children deprived of parental support. Respect for old people and support for relatives shall be a sacred 3. tradition of the People of Kyrghyzstan 15

Article 27 1. In the Kyrghyz Republic social maintenance at the expense of the government shall be guaranteed in old age, in sickness and in the event of complete or partial disability or loss of the breadwinner. Pensions and social maintenance in accordance with economic 2. resources of the society shall provide a standard of living not below the minimum wage established by law. Voluntary social insurance and the establishment of additional forms 3. of security and charity shall be encouraged. Article 28 1. Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to protection of labor in all its forms and ways, including the right to working conditions which comply with norms of security and hygiene, as well as the right to social protection against unemployment. The government shall provide for professional training and 2. improvement of professional skills of citizens, and shall encourage and promote international agreements and international organizations which have the aim of consolidating and securing the right to work. 3. The forced labor of citizens shall be prohibited, except in cases of war, natural disaster, epidemic, or in other extraordinary circumstances, as well as in the execution of punishment upon sentence of the court. Article 29 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic working under labor agreement (contract) shall have the right to fair remuneration not below the minimum wage established by the government. Article 30 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to strike. The procedure and conditions for holding strikes shall be prescribed by law. Article 31 1. Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to rest.

The Maximum duration of the working hours, the minimum weekly 2. rest and annual paid leave as well as other terms of exercise of the right to rest shall be prescribed by law.

16

Article 32 1. Every citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to education. 2. General secondary education shall be compulsory and free of charge. Every person shall have the right to get it at national educational institutions. Every citizen shall have the right to get free education at national educational institutions. 3. The State shall provide for every person in accordance with individual aptitude accessibility to vocational, special secondary and higher education. 4. Paid education for citizens at national and other educational institutions shall be allowed on the basis and in the procedure established by legislation. 5. The State shall exercise control over the activity of educational institutional Article 33 Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to housing. The State promotes the fulfillment of the right to housing by giving and selling state-owned housing, encouragement of individual housebuilding. Article 34 1. Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall enjoy the right to protection of health, to benefit freely from the network of state public health, institutions. 2. Paid medical service shall be allowed on the basis and in the procedure established by law. Article 35 1. Citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to healthy safe environment and to compensation for the damage caused to ones health and property by the activity in the sphere of nature usage. The protection of environment, natural resources and historical 2. monuments shall be the sacred duty of every citizen. 1. Article 36 Culture, art, literature, science and the mass media shall be free.

17

2. The State shall protect historical monuments, care of and provide the necessary conditions for the development of literature, art, science, the mass media and sports. 3. Citizens shall have the right to enjoy cultural benefits, to study art and science. Article 37 Social activity of the State shall not be substituted by state care limiting economic freedom and activity, the opportunity of a citizen to achieve economic welfare for himself and his family. Article 38 1. It is the duty of the state and all its bodies and officials to provide for full, absolute and immediate protection of the rights and freedoms of citizens, to prevent the infringement of rights in this sphere and to restore the violated provisions. 2. The Kyrghyz Republic shall guarantee judicial defence of all the rights and freedoms of citizens established bay the Constitution and laws. Article 39 1. A citizen charged with an offence shall be presumed innocent until found guilty by sentence of the court. 2. The State shall guarantee everyone defence from arbitrary and unlawful interference with one's private and family life, infringement of one's honour and dignity, or breach of secrecy of correspondence and telephone conversations. 3. No one shall have the right to enter a dwelling except in cases when it is necessary to conduct a sanctioned search or seizure of pubic order, to arrest a criminal, or to save the life health or property of a person. Article 40 Every citizen in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be guaranteed effective legal assistance and defence of the rights and freedoms provided for by the Constitution. Article 41 The publication of laws and other normative legal acts concerning the rights freedoms and duties of an individual and a citizen shall be a compulsory condition for their application.

18

CHAPTER III PRESIDENT Article 42 1. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be the head of the State shall represent the Kyrghyz Republic inside the country and in foreign relations. 2. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall secure the unity of the state and the stability of the Constitutional order; he shall act in the capacity of the guarantor of the Constitution and laws, the rights and freedoms of citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic and shall provide for the coordinated functioning and interaction of national bodies.
SECTION 1

THE ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT Article 43 1. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be elected for a term of five years. 2. The same person shall not be elected President for more than two terms running. 3. A citizen of the Kyrghyz republic may be elected President of the Kyrghyz Republic if he is not younger than 35 years of age and is not older than 65 years of age, who has command of the official language and have been a resident of the republic for not less than 15 years before the nomination of his candidature to the office of President. 4. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall not be Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh, shall not hold other posts and engage in free enterprise activity. 5. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall suspend his activity in political parties and organizations during the term of office till the beginning of a new election for President of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 44 1. A new election for the office of President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be held two months before the date on which the Powers of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic expire.
2. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be elected by citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic by a majority of actual votes cast; elections shall be held on the basis of universal equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot.

19

The number of candidates for the office of President of the Kyrghyz 3. Republic shall not be limited. Any person who has registered and has obtained not less then 50,000 voter signatures may be a candidate for President of the Kyrghyz Republic. 4. The election of the President shall be considered valid if more than fifty percent of all voters in the republic have taken part in the election. In the first ballot, a candidate shall be considered elected to the office of President if he has obtained more than half of those votes cast in the election. If none of the candidates obtains more than half of the votes cast in the first ballot, only the two candidates who have obtained the largest number of votes shall be appear on the second ballot. A candidate who obtains more than half of the votes cast in the second ballot shall be considered elected if not less than fifty percent of all voters have taken part in the second ballot. Article 45 1. The results of the election for President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be confirmed by the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic not later than seven days after the date of the election. After the Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Kyrghyz Republic 2. announces the results of voting, the President shall take the oath of office within 30 days. 3. Upon entry into office, the President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall take an oath before the People of Kyrghyzstan: "I, ..., taking on the obligations of President of the Kyrghyz Republic, before my People and the sacred Motherland of Ala-Too do swear: To observe and protect the Constitution and laws of the Kyrghyz Republic; to guard the Sovereignty and independence of the Kyrghyz State; to respect and guarantee the rights and freedoms of all citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic; to perform faithfully the high duties of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic entrusted to me by the confidence of all the People!" The term of the Presidential mandate shall become effective from the 4. moment of taking the oath of office. The Powers of the President shall terminate upon the moment a newly-elected President enters office.

20

	

SECTION II THE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT Article 46 1.	 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: 1) determine the structure of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic and submit it to the confirmation by the Jogorku Kenesh; 2) appoint the Prime Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic with the consent of the jogorku Kenesh; 3) appoint members of the Government upon presentation by the Prime Minister and with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh; 4) relieve members of the Government and heads of administrative departments of the Kyrghyz Republic; 5) accept the resignation of the Government; on his own initiative with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh shall take a decision on withdrawal of the Powers of the Government before the date the Powers of the Government expire; 2.	 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: 1) appoint with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh the ProcuratorGeneral of the Kyrghyz Republic; 2) appoint with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh the Chairman of the Board of the National Bank of the Kyrghyz Republic; 3) appoint upon presentation by the Prime Minister and with the consent of the corresponding local Keneshs, the heads of state administrations of oblasts and the city of Bishkek; 4) approve Heads of regional and city state administrations nominated by the Prime Minister with the consent of local Keneshs upon presentation by the Heads of state administrations of regions and the city of Bishkek; 5) present to the Jogorku Kenesh the candidatures for the office of Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, Deputy Chairman and seven judges of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic; 6) present to the Jogorku Kenesh the candidatures for the offices of Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, Deputy Chairmen and judges of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic;

21

	

7) appoint with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh Chairmen, deputy Chairmen and judges of regional courts, the court of the city of Bishkek, district and city courts, regional economic courts as well as military tribunals of the Kyrghyz Republic and remove them from office in the events prescribed by the Constitution and laws; 8) appoint with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh Heads of diplomatic missions of the Kyrghyz Republic in foreign countries and international organizations; 9) receive the Letters of Credence and Recall of diplomatic missions of foreign countries and representatives of international organizations accredited to him; 10) confer high military ranks, diplomatic ranks, class ranks and other special titles. 3.	 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: 1) decide the matters concerning granting citizenship of the Kyrghyz Republic and withdrawal from it, grant Pardon; 2) award orders and medals as well as other state rewards of the Kyrghyz Republic; award honorary ranks and state bonuses of the Kyrghyz Republic; 4.	 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: 1) on his own initiative submit bills to the Jogorku Kenesh; 2) sign with a two week term laws after their adoption by the Jogorku Kenesh or refer them to the Jogorku Kenesh with his remarks for a second consideration. If the Jogorku Kenesh confirms the previously taken decision by a majority of 2/3 from the total number of Deputies, the President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall sign the law; if the President does not express his attitude to the law within a two week term and does not demand its second consideration, he shall be obliged to sign that law; 3) address the People with an annual report on the situation in the Republic announced in the Jogorku Kenesh; 4) conduct international negotiations and sign international treaties of the Kyrghyz Republic; submit them for ratification to the Jogorku Kenesh; 5) have the right to protest to the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic against a law adopted by the Jogorku Kenesh or an international treaty ratified by the Jogorku Kenesh;

22

6) abolish or suspend the effect of acts of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic, Ministries, state committees and administrative departments of the Kyrghyz Republic, Heads of local state administration in case they contravene the Constitution and Laws of the Kyrghyz Republic. 5.	 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall have the right to: 1) convene an extraordinary session of the Uluk Kenesh 2) submit issues of state life to a public referendum; 3) dissolve the Jogorku Kenesh before the date on which its Powers expire in accordance with the results of a public referendum and set up the date of a new election to the Jogorku Kenesh. 6. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall notify of a possibility of introduction of a state of emergency with the existence of grounds envisaged by law and in case of necessity shall impose it in separate localities without preliminary announcement and immediately notify the Jogorku Kenesh. 7. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall declare universal or partial mobilization, declare a state of war in case of military aggression against the Kyrghyz Republic and shall immediately submit this issue to the consideration by the Jogorku Kenesh; he shall proclaim martial law in the interests of defence of the country and security of the consideration by the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 47 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be the Commander-inChief of the Armed Forces, he shall appoint and replace the command-inchief of the Armed Forces of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 48 1. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall issue within his Powers on the basis and for the implementation of the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic decrees binding upon the whole territory of the country. 2. The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall issue resolutions and instructions on separate matters referred to his competence. Article 49 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic may delegate the execution of his Powers envisaged in sub-point 9 of point 2 and in sub-point 4 of point 4 of Article 46 to the Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh.

23

Article 50 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic shall enjoy the right of integrity and immunity. Article 51 1. The Powers of the President may be stopped as a result of his retirement by a resignation sent to the Jogorku Kenesh, inability to discharge his Powers in the event of a disease, in case of his death as well as in the event of removal from office in the events envisaged in the present Constitution. 2. In case the President of the Kyrghyz Republic is unable to discharge his Powers on the account of a disease, the Jogorku Kenesh shall on the basis of the conclusion of an independent medical commission decide on the removal of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic before the date on which the Powers of the President expire; a majority of not less than 2/3 of votes from the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be required to remove the President. Article 52 The President of the Kyrghyz Republic can be removed from his office for state treason and other crimes only by a majority of the Jogorku Kenesh, with no less than two/thirds of the whole number of deputies present, on the basis of a resolution of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 53 1. In case of inability of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic to exercise his Powers on any reason they shall be delegated to the Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh pending the election of a new President. In case the Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh is unable to discharge the powers of the President they shall be delegated to the Prime Minister. The election of a new President of the Kyrghyz Republic in this case 2. shall be held within three months. CHAPTER IV THE JOGORKU KENESH SECTION 1 THE ELECTION OF THE JOGORKU KENESH Article 54 1. The Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be the highest standing representative body. The legislative power and functions of control shall be vested in the Jogorku Kenesh.
24

2. The Jogorku Kenesh shall consist of 105 Deputies who shall be elected for a term of five years. The procedure of election of the Deputies shall be determined by the Constitutional act. Article 55 Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be elected from electoral 1. districts on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. A voter from every electoral district shall have one vote. Voters 2. shall take part in the election directly and on equal grounds. Article 56 A citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic may be elected Deputy of the 1. Jogorku Kenesh if he has attained the age of 25 and permanently resided in the Republic for not less than 5 years. Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be a representative of the 2. People of Kyrghyzstan, shall be subordinate to the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic and his conscience. Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh shall have the right to integrity and 3. immunity. He may not be persecuted for his statements expressed in accordance with his activity of a Deputy and for the results of his voting in the Jogorku Kenesh. A Deputy shall not be detained or arrested, subject to search or individual examination except when he is caught in the act. Provisional commissions of the Jogorku Kenesh shall examine the validity of measures taken by the competent bodies and if these measures have not been taken by a court, the Jogorku Kenesh shall invalidate them. A Deputy may be prosecuted for criminal or administrative activity only with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh. A Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh shall have no right to hold any 4. posts in state service, judicial bodies, engage in business activity. A Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh may be deprived of his mandate 5. only in case of his resignation, commitment of a crime, disability confirmed not otherwise than by a motivated resolution of the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 57 A Deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh shall have the right to address inquires to bodies and officials of state administration, who are obliged to respond to the inquiry at the session of the Jogorku Kenesh.

25

SECTION 2 THE POWERS OF THE JOGORKU KENESH Article 58 The following powers shall be vested in the Uluk Kenesh: 1) to amend and change the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic in accordance with the procedure established by the Constitution; 2) to adopt laws of the Kyrghyz Republic; to amend laws and to exercise control over their fulfillment; 3) to make official interpretation of the adopted normative acts; 4) to determine the guide-lines of home and foreign policy; 5) to approve the republican Budget of the Kyrghyz Republic; and the report on its execution; 6) to determine the monetary system in the Kyrghyz Republic; 7) to change the bounds of the Kyrghyz Republic: 8) to decide the matters concerning administrative territorial structure of the Kyrghyz republic; 9) to set up the date of election for President of the Kyrghyz Republic; 10) to organize the Central Commission on election and referenda; 11) upon presentation by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic to elect the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, Deputy Chairman and seven judges of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic; 12) upon presentation by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic to elect the Chairman of the Supreme Court, the Chairman of the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, Deputy Chairmen and judges of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic; 13) to determine the structure of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic; 14) to give consent to the appointment of the Prime Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic and the composition of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Procurator - General of the Kyrghyz Republic and the Chairman of the Board of the National Bank.

26

15) to give consent to the appointment of heads of diplomatic missions of the Kyrghyz Republic to foreign countries and international organizations; 16) to give consent to the dissolution of the Government before the date on which the Powers of the Government expire; 17) upon presentation by the Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh to appoint the Chairman and Deputy Chairmen of the Supervisory Chamber of the Jogorku Kenesh; 18) to ratify and denounce international treaties; to decide issues of war and peace; 19) to institute military ranks diplomatic ranks, class ranks and other special titles of the Kyrghyz Republic; 20) to establish state awards and honorary titles of the Kyrghyz Republic; 21) to issue acts on amnesty; 22) to impose a state of emergency or to confirm and abolish the act of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic on this issue; the resolution of the Jogorku Kenesh approving the decision of the President to impose a state of emergency shall abe adopted by a majority of not less than 2/3 from the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh; 23) to proclaim martial law, announce a state of war and to issue a resolution concerning their declaration by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic; 24) to decision on the use of the contingent of Armed Forces of the republic when it is necessary to support peace and security in accordance intergovernmental treaty obligations; 25) to hear reports of the bodies formed or elected by it as well as reports of officials appointed or elected by it; in case when it is necessary, to decide the question of confidence to the Government of the republic or its individual member by a majority of 2/3 from the total number of Deputies by secret ballot. 26) to submit the matters of state life to a referendum; 27) to decide the matter concerning the removal of officials in the events specified in Article 52 and point I of Article 81 of the present Constitution.

27

Article 59 1. The Jogorku Kenesh shall elect the Toroga and Deputy Toroga from among Deputies, from committees, Supervisory Chamber and provisional commissions. 2. The Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be elected by secret ballot. He shall be accountable to the Jogorku Kenesh and may be relieved from his office by the decision of the Jogorku Kenesh taken by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the total number of the Deputies. 3. The Toroga of the Jogorku Kenesh shall preside at the sessions of the Jogorku Kenesh, exercise general control over the preparation of the matters liable to consideration at the sessions of the Jogorku Kenesh and its Presidium and shall be responsible for their internal order, sign resolutions and decisions adopted by the Jogorku Kenesh and its Presidium and shall exercise other powers vested in it by the Constitution and laws of the Kyrghyz Republic. 4. Deputy Torogas of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be elected by secret ballot, they shall carry out on the commission of the Toroga his separate functions and act as Toroga in case of his absence or inability to discharge his Powers. Article 60 1. The Toroga, Deputy Torogas, Chairmen of committees shall form the Presidium of the Jogorku Kenesh. 2. The Presidium of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be accountable to the Jogorku Kenesh and shall provides the organization of its activity. 3. The Presidium shall prepare the sittings of the Jogorku Kenesh, coordinate the activity of committees and provisional commissions, organize nation - wide discussion of draft laws of the Kyrghyz Republic and other important issues of state life. 4. The Presidium shall publish texts of laws of the Kyrghyz Republic and other acts adopted by the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 61 Committees and provisional commissions of the Jogorku Kenesh shall conduct law drafting works, preliminary consider questions referred to competence of the Jogorku Kenesh, supervise the implementation adopted laws and decisions. Article 62 The Procedure of activity of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be determined by rules. 28

Article 63 The Jogorku Kenesh may be dissolved before the date on which its Powers expire by the decision taken by not less than 2/3 of the total number of Deputies or on the results of a nation-wide referendum. SECTION 3 THE LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY OF THE JOGORKU KENESH Article 64 The right to initiate laws shall be vested in Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh, the President of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Supreme Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic and people's initiative 30,000 of electors. Article 65 A bill submitted to the Jogorku Kenesh shall be discussed in the committees after which the bill shall be referred to the Presidium which shall send it for consideration to the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 66 The bill shall be considered passed if it have been voted for by a 1. majority of the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh. In case of amending or changing the Constitution of the Kyrghyz 2. Republic, adoption of the constitutional acts and amending them not less than 2/3 of votes from the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh shall be required. Amending the Constitution and constitutional acts shall be prohibited 3. during a state of emergency and martial law. Article 67 A law shall become effective since the moment of its publication if not indicated otherwise in the law itself or in the resolution of the Jogorku Kenesh on the procedure of its implementation. Article 68 A referendum shall be held by the proposal of not less than 300,000 of electors or 1/3 of the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh.

29

CHAPTER V THE EXECUTIVE POWER Article 69 The Executive Power in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be vested in the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic, accountable to it ministries, state committees, administrative departments, local state administration. SECTION 1 THE GOVERNMENT Article 70 The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be the highest 1. executive body of State Power in the Kyrghyz Republic. The activity of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be 2. headed by the Prime Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic. The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall consist of the Prime Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic, Vice - Prime Ministers, Ministers and Chairmen of state committees of the Kyrghyz Republic. The structure of the Government shall be determined by the 3. President of the Kyrghyz Republic upon presentation of the Prime Minister and shall be approved by the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 71 The Prime Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: present to the President the candidatures for the office of members of the Government; form and abolish administrative departments of the Kyrghyz Republic; appoint Heads of administrative departments; present to the President the candidatures for the office of heads of regional state administrations and state administration of the city of Bishkek; appoint with the consent of local Kenesh Heads of district and town state administrations upon presentation by Heads of state administrations of regions and the city of Bishkek and remove them from office; The decisions by the Prime Minister concerning appointment and removal shall become effective after they have been approved by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic.

30

Article 72 1. The President of the Kyrghyz republic shall exercise control over the work of the Government of the Kyrghyz Republic. The President shall have the right to preside at the sitting of the Government. 2. The annual report on the work of the Government shall be submitted to the Jogorku Kenesh by the Prime-Minister. The Jogorku Kenesh shall have the right to demand the report from the Government or its individual member. Article 73 The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall decide all matters of 1. state governing except of administrative and supervisory authorities vested in the President of the Kyrghyz Republic arid the Jogorku Kenesh by the Constitution. 2. Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall: prepare the republican Budget, submit it to the Jogorku Kenesh and provide its implementation; pursue budgetary financial, tax and price policy; organize and manage state property; take measures on the defence of the country, state security, implementation of foreign policy of the Kyrghyz Republic; take measures to provide the rule of law, the rights and freedoms, of citizens, protection of property and public order, fight with criminality. The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic and the National Bank of 3. Kyrghyzstan shall provide for a sole monitory, credit and currency policy. Article 74 The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall issue decrees and ordinances binding throughout the territory of the Kyrghyz Republic for all bodies, organizations, officials and citizens and organize, supervise and secure their fulfillment. Article 75 1. The Government of the Kyrghyz Republic shall guide the activity of ministries, state committees, administrative departments and bodies of local state administration.

31

2. Ministries, state committees and administrative departments shall issue within their competence decrees and ordinances on the basis and for the implementation of the Constitution. laws of the Kyrghyz Republic, resolutions of the Jogorku Kenesh, acts of the President, organize, verify and secure their implementation. 3. The government shall hear reports of the Heads of local state administration. invalidate the acts of the heads of local state administration which contravene the legislation with further notice of the President. Article 76 The Procuracy of the K y rghyz Republic shall within its competence supervise the precise and universal observation of legislative acts. The bodies of the Procuracy shall exercise criminal pursuit, participate in judicial proceedings in cases and in the procedure prescribed by law. SECTION 2 LOCAL STATE ADMINISTRATION Article 77 The executive power in regions, districts and towns shall be vested 1. in local state administration directed by the Heads of the local state administration. The executive power in ails [auls-villages] and settlements shall be 2. vested in the chairmen of the corresponding Keneshs of the ails and settlements. Article 78 The heads of local state administration and the chairmen of the 1. Keneshs of the ails and settlements shall act under the guidance of the Government. Decisions reached by the heads of local state administration or by the 2. chairmen of the Keneshs of ails and settlements within their competence shall be binding throughout the corresponding territory. CHAPTER VI COURTS AND JUSTICE Article 79 Justice in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be administered only by the 1. courts. 2. In the Kyrghyz Republic there shall be the following courts: 32

The Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Supreme Court of the Kyrghyz Republic, the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic and local courts (regional courts, courts of the city of Bishkek, district and municipal courts, regional economic courts, military tribunals as well as courts of elders and courts of Arbitration). The creation and establishment of extraordinary or special courts and judicial positions shall not be allowed. 3. The status of courts and judges in the Kyrghyz Republic shall be specified by the constitutional laws. The organization of and procedure for court operation shall be specified by law. 4. A judges shall be subordinate only to the Constitution and the Law. A judges shall enjoy the right to integrity and immunity and in accordance with his status shall be provided with social, material and other guarantees of his independence. Article 80 1. A citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic may serve as a judge on the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic if hi is not younger than 35 years of age and not older than 70 years of age, who have higher legal education and not less than 10 years of experience in the legal profession. Judges of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be elected for a term of fifteen years by the Jogorku Kenesh upon presentation by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic. Judges of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be elected for a term of ten years by the Jogorku Kenesh upon presentation by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic. A citizen of the Kyrghyz Republic may serve as a judge on a local 2. court if he is not older than 65 years of age, has higher legal education and not less than 5 years of experience in the legal profession. Judges of local courts shall be appointed by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic with the consent of the Jogorku Kenesh; the first term shall be for 3 years, and subsequent terms shall be for 7 years. Article 81 1. Judges of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and the Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic may be removed from office for treason and other offenses by the Jogorku Kenesh on the basis of the judgement of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic; the

33

majority of not less than 2/3 of the votes of the total number of Deputies shall be required to remove a judge from office. 2. Judges of local courts may be removed from office on the basis of their health, at their personal request, according to the results of examinations, for the violation of law or dishonorable conduct incompatible with their high position as well as on the basis of a binding court judgement, A judge of a local court may be prosecuted for criminal activity with the consent of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 82 1. The Constitutional Court shall be the highest body of judicial power for the protection of judicial power for the protection of the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic.
2. The Constitutional Court shall consist of the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman and seven judges of the Constitutional Court.

3.

The Constitutional Court shall: 1) declare laws and other normative legal acts unconstitutional in the event they contravene the Constitution; 2) decide disputes concerning the effect, application and interpretation of the Constitution; 3) determine the validity of the elections for President of the Kyrghyz Republic; 4) issues a judgement concerning the removal from office of the President of the Kyrghyz Republic as well as judges of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court of and the High Court of Arbitrage of the Kyrghyz Republic; 5) give its consent for the criminal prosecution of judges of local courts; 6) issue a judgement concerning amendments and changes to the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic; 7) annul the decisions of bodies of local self-government which contravene the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic; 8) render decisions concerning the constitutionality of practices on the application of laws which affect the constitutional rights of citizens.

34

A decision of the Constitutional Court shall be final and no appeal 4. will be heard. If the Constitutional Court declares laws or other acts unconstitutional, such laws or acts shall no longer be in effect on the territory of the Kyrghyz Republic; such a finding shall also annul normative and others which are based on the act declared unconstitutional. Article 83 The Supreme Court of the Kyrghyz Republic shall be highest body 1. of judicial power in the sphere of civil, criminal and administrative court action. The Supreme Court of the Kyrghyz Republic shall supervise the 2. operation of the court of the city of Bishkek, regional, municipal courts and military tribunals of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 84 The Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic and regional 1. economic courts shall form a single system of economic courts of the Kyrghyz Republic. Economic Courts shall decide economic disputes between objects of 2. economy based on different forms of property. The Supreme Economic Court of the Kyrghyz Republic shall 3. supervise the operation of regional economic courts of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 85 Courts of elders and courts of arbitration may be established on the 1. territory of ails, settlements, cities by the decision of citizens' meetings from among elder people and other citizens held in respect and authority. Courts of elders and courts of arbitration shall consider property, 2. family disputes and other cases envisaged by law referred to them by the arguing parties with the purpose of conciliation and passing a just decision which do not contravene the law. The decisions of courts of elders and courts of arbitration may be 3. appealed to the corresponding regional and municipal courts of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 86 1. The decisions of courts of the Kyrghyz Republic which have come into force shall be binding upon all state body, economic objects, public organizations, officials and citizens on the territory of the republic.

35

2. Non-execution of court decisions which came into force as well as interference with the activity of courts shall lead to responsibility established by Law. Article 87 1. A court shall have no right to adopt a normative act which contravene the Constitution of the Kyrghyz Republic. 2. If in the process of consideration of a case in any judicial instance there arises a doubt on the constitutionality of a law of any other act on which the decision of the case depend, the court shall send an inquiry to the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic. Article 88 1. A citizen shall have the right to defence of his dignity and rights in trial in case of any public or any other accusation; under no circumstances he shall be denied such court defence. The defence shall be an inalienable right of a person at any stage of 2. consideration of a case. Citizens without financial means shall be given legal assistance and defence at the expense of the Government. 3. Every participant of a trial shall have the right to be heard. Article 89 The burden of proving guilt on criminal and administrative cases is 1. on the procurator. Evidences received by way of violation of law shall not be 2. acknowledge; reference to their in trial shall not be allowed. Article 90 1.	 Principles of justice established by the Constitution shall be universal and single for all courts and judges in the Kyrghyz Republic. CHAPTER VII LOCAL SELF - GOVERNMENT Article 91 Matters of life of the population of ails, towns, districts, regions which are local significance shall be decided on the basis of local selfgovernment functioning along with the State Power.

36

Article 92 Local self- government in ails, settlements, districts and regions shall be exercised by local Keneshs, elected by the population of the corresponding territorial units. Article 93 Laws of the Kyrghyz Republic shall establish the fundamentals of the organization and functioning of local self- government as well as they shall regulate between local self- government and bodies of local state administration. Article 94 Chairmen of ail and settlement Keneshs shall be heads of local self government and shall perform the functions of local state administration. Article 95 1. Local Keneshs shall: approve and exercise control over the programs of social and economic development on the territory and social protection of the population; approve the local budget and report on its implementation as well as they shall hear information on the use of extra-budgetary funds. 2. Local Keneshs of districts, town, regions shall have the right to take the vote of no confidence to the Head of local state administration of the corresponding territorial unit. 3. Local Keneshs shall operate irrespective of local state administration. 4. Local Keneshs within their powers shall adopt acts binding throughout their territory. CHAPTER VIII THE PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THE KYRGHYZ REPUBLIC Article 96 1. Amendments and additions to the present Constitution shall be adopted by the Jogorku Kenesh upon presentation by the President of the Kyrghyz Republic by the majority of not less than 1/3 of the Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrghyz Republic or not less than 300,000 citizens of the Kyrghyz Republic. 37

Proposals concerning amending and changing the Constitution of 2. the Kyrghyz Republic shall be considered by the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrghyz Republic on receipt of the judgement of the Constitutional Court of the Kyrghyz Republic not earlier than in three months and not later than six months since the date of their registration. The wording of amendments and additions tot he Constitution of the 3. Kyrghyz Republic may not be changed in the course of their discussion by the Jogorku Kenesh. Article 97 Amendments and additions to the Constitution of the Kyrghyz 1. Republic shall be deemed adopted if they have received 2/3 of votes of the total number of Deputies of the Jogorku Kenesh. The Proposal which has not been passed may be submitted for a 2. second consideration not earlier than in a year.

38

