CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

LATVIA
by GISBERT H. FLANZ & KENNETH W. FLANZ

RELEASE 92-5 Issued September 1992

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains British Crown Copyright Material which is reproduced by permission of the Controller of Her Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office. This work contains material © Copyright by the Government Printer, Australian Government Publishing Service, and is reproduced with permission.

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1992 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

TEXT OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE LATVIAN REPUBLIC Adopted by the Latvian Constituent Assembly Plenary Session of February 15, 1922 The people of Latvia, through their freelyelected Constituent Assembly, have adopted the following Constitution: PART 1. General Provisions 1. 2. 3. Latvia is an independent democratic republic. The sovereign power of the Latvian State is vested in the people of Latvia. The territory of the Latvian State is composed of Vidzeme (Livonia), Latgale, Kurzeme (Courland), and Zemgale, within borders fixed by international treaties. The Latvian national flag is crimson with a white stripe. PART 2. The Legislative Saeima (Congress). 5. 6. 7. The Saeima shall consist of one hundred representatives of the people. The Saeima shall be elected by general, equal, direct, secret, and proportional suffrage. Latvia being divided into special election districts, the number of members of the Saeima to be elected in each dibtrict, shall be fixed in proportion to the number of voters in each district. All Latvian citizens with full rights, of either sex, who on the first election day shall have attained the age of twenty-one years, are entitled to suffrage. Any Latvian citizen with full rights, who on the first election day shall have attained the age of twenty-one years, may be elected to the Saeima. The Saeima shall be elected for a period of three years. sections for the Saeima shall take place on e first Sunday in October, and the previous
25

4.

8.

9.

12.

13.

14. 15. 16.

17.

Saturday. The newly-elected Saeima shall meet for the first session on the first Tuesday in November, on which day the term of office for the previous Saeima shall expire. If the Saeima shall be dissolved and new elections shall take place at another time of the year, the new Saeima shall meet not later than one month after the election, and the term of office of that Saeima shall terminate after two years on the first Tuesday in November, simultaneously with the meeting of the newly-elected Saeima. The voters cannot recall individual members of the Saeima. The Saeima shall hold its sessions in Riga, and only in consequence of extraordinary circumstances may it meet at another place. The Sacima shall elect a Presidium, which shall consist of a President, two VicePresidents and a Secretary. The Presidium of the Saeima shall function uninterruptedly throughout the whole term of office of the Saeima. The first session of the newly-elected Saeima shall be opened by the President of the former Saeima or, on the instruction of the Presidium, by another member of the Presidium. The Saeima itself shall judge the qualifications of its members. The Presidium of the Saeima shall convene the regular sessions and call special or extraordinary sessions. The Presidium of the Saeima shall be obliged to call special or extraordinary sessions if requested to do so by the President of State, the Prime Minister, or by not less than one-third of the members of the Saeima. In respect to internal work the Saeima shall determine the rules of its proceedings. The sessions of the Saeima shall be public, at the request of ten members, the President of State, the Prime Minister or a Minister, the Saeima may hold secret

18. 19. 20.

21. 22.

26

23. 24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

sessions if not less than two-thirds of the members present are in favor of such a motion. Sessions of the Saeima may be held if they are attended by at least one-half of the members of the Saemia. With the exception of cases expressly mentioned in the Constitution the Saeima shall make its decisions by the vote of an absolute majority of the members present. The Saeima shall appoint commissions, fixing the number of their members and their scope of activity. The commissions are entitled to receive all necessary information from the competent Ministers and also to invite Ministers and responsible workers of Government institutions to give explanations to the commissions. The commissions may function also between sessions. The Saeima in certain cases shall appoint special parliamentary commissions of investigation, if this is requested by not less than one-third of the members of the Saeima. The Saeima shall have the right to interrogate the Prime Minister, or the Ministers, to which interrogations the said Prime Minister, or the Ministers, shall be bound to reply personally or through an authorized responsible person in an official position. At the request of the Saeima or its commissions, the Prime Minister or the Ministers shall be compelled to submit any documents which may be required. For voting one way or another, as well as for any utterances made in their capacity as members of the Saeima, members cannot be prosecuted in court, nor may any administrative disciplinary punishment be imposed upon them. Members of the Saeima may be prosecuted in court only (1) for slander, knowing it to be slander, (2) for defamation regarding private family life, even if the respective utterances are made in an official capacity. A member of the Saeima cannot be arrested; his dwelling cannot be searched, nor his

27

30.

31.

32.

33. 34.

personal freedom restricted in any other way, unless the Saeima consents to such measures. A member of the Saeima may be arrested only if caught in the act of committing a crime. Within twenty-four hours of the arrest or detention of a member of the Saeima, the Presidium of the Saeima must be notified, and the Presidium shall place before the next session of the Saeima the question whether the arrested member is to be detained in custody or liberated. During the recess of the Saeima, the Presidium of the Saeima shall have the power to decide whether or not a member is to be held in custody. No legal or administrative proceedings can be taken against a member of the Saeima for any criminal action, without consent of the Saeima. A member of the Saeima shall be entitled to refuse to give evidence: (1) concerning persons who have given him, as representative of the people, certain information, or confided to him certain facts; (2) regarding persons to whom he, in his capacity as representative of the people, entrusted facts or information; (3) concerning such facts and information. A member of the Saeima can neither in his own name nor in the name of other persons, assume Government contracts and concessions. The provisions of this article apply also to Ministers, who are not members of the Saeima. Members of the Saeima draw a salary from the Government. Nobody shall be liable to legal prosecution for giving information concerning the open sessions of the Saeima and commissions, provided such information is in keeping with the truth. Account of closed sessions of the Saeima or the commission may be given only by permission of the Presidium of the Saeima or the respective commissions. PART 3. The President of State. 28

35. 36. 37. 38.

39. 40.

41.

42.

43. 44.

The President of State shall be elected by the Saeima for a term of three years. The President of State shall be elected by secret ballot and must not receive less than fifty-one votes. No person can be elected to the office of President of State, who has not attained the age of forty years. The office of the President of State cannot be amalgamated with any other office. If a member of the Saeima is elected President of State, he must resign his membership in the Saeima. One person cannot continuously occupy the office of President of State for more than six years. At the session following the election of the President of State, he shall enter upon his duties by giving the following solemn promise: "I swear that all my endeavors shall be given for the good of the people of Latvia. I shall do everything in my power to further the welfare of the Latvian State and the prosperity of its inhabitants. I shall hold sacred the Latvian Constitution and the laws of the State, I shall be just to all, and I shall fulfill my duties to the best of my ability." The President of State shall represent the State in international relations. He shall appoint Latvian diplomatic representatives and receive such representatives of other States. He shall execute the decisions of the Saeima in regard to the ratification of international treaties. The President of State shall be the supreme leader of the armed forces of the State. In time of war he shall appoint the Commander-in-chief. The President of State shall declare war in execution of the Decision of the Saeima. The President of State shall have the right to take all necessary steps, from a military point of view, in the event that another state shall declare war upon Latvia, or an enemy shall invade Latvian territory Simultaneously the President of State shall immediately convene the Saeima, which shall 29

45.

46.

47. 48.

49.

50.

51.

decide concerning the declaration of war and the beginning of hostilities. The President of State shall have the right to pardon persons who have been sentenced by the court, but such right of pardon shall not apply to cases for which another mode of pardoning is established by law. Amnesty is a prerogative of the Saeima. The President of State shall have the right to convene and to conduct extraordinary Cabinet sessions, appointing the order of the day for them. The President of State shall have the right of legislative initiative. The President of State shall have the right of initiative is the dissolution of the Saeima. After that a plebiscite shall take place. If more than one-half of the votes shall be registered in favor of dissolution, the Saeima shall be considered dissolved and new elections shall be held, to take place not later than two months after the Saeima has been dissolved. If the Saeima shall be dissolved, the authority of the members of the Saeima shall remain in force until the new Saeima shall convene but the old Saeima can meet only if convoked by the President of State. The President of State shall appoint the order of the day for such sessions of the Saeima. If more than one-half of the votes registered at the plebiscite shall be against a dissolution of the Saeima, then the President of State shall be considered as dismissed from his office, and the Saeima shall elect a new President of State for the remainder of the dismissed President's term of office. At the request of not less than one-half of the total number of members of the Saeima, the Saeima may in a secret session, following a decision of not less than twothirds of the total number of members, dismiss the President of State. After such action, the Saemia must without delay elect a new President of State. In case the President of State shall resign

52.

30

53.

54.

his office, in the event of his death, or if he shall be dismissed prior to the expiration of his term of office, his duties shall be taken over by the President of the Saeima, pending the election of a new President of State by the Saeima. Likewise shall the President of the Saeima take the place of the President of State if the latter is absent from the territory of the State, or if he is otherwise prevented from attending to his duties. The President of State shall bear no political responsibility for his actions. All acts emanating from the President of State must be countersigned by the Prime Minister or the competent Minister, who thereby assumes all responsibility for such acts, with the exception of contingencies mentioned in Articles forty-six and fortyeight. The President of State can be subjected to criminal prosecution if this is consented to by the Saeima by a vote of two-thirds of its members. PART 4. The Cabinet of Ministers.

55. 56. 57.

58. 59.

The Cabinet of Ministers shall consist of the Prime Minister and the Ministers invited by him to take office. The Cabinet of Ministers is to be formed by such persons as may be designated by the President of State. The number of Ministers and the scope of their work, as well as the mutual relations between State institutions, are to be established by law. To the Cabinet of Ministers are subordinated the institution of State administration. The Prime Minister and the Ministers require in the carrying out of their duties the confidence of the Saeima, and for their actions they are responsible to the Saeima. If the Saeima shall pass a vote of nonconfidence in the Prime Minister, the entire Cabinet must resign. If a vote of non

31

60.

61.

62.

63.

confidence shall be passed against any one Minister shall invite another person to take his place. The sessions of the Cabinet of Ministers shall be conducted by the Prime Minister, and during his absence by a Minister authorized by him. The Cabinet of Ministers shall discuss all bills proposed by the separate Ministries, as well as all questions relating to more than one Ministry, and also political questions submitted by separate members of the Cabinet. If the State shall be threatened by an outside enemy, or within the State, or a part of it, disturbances shall break out it threaten to break out, the Cabinet of Ministers shall have the right to promulgate a "state of exceptional law," notifying the Presidium of the Saeima of such action within twenty-four hours, the latter to be required to submit such decision of the Cabinet of Ministers to the Saeima without delay. Ministers, even if they are not members of the Saeima, and responsible State officials authorized by a Minister, shall have the right to participate in the sessions of the Saeima and its commissions and to submit additions and amendments to legislative bills. PART 5. Legislation.

64. 65.

66.

The right of legislation is vested in the Saeima, and also in the people within the scope established by this Constitution. Legislative bills may be placed before the Saeima by the President of State, the Cabinet of Ministers, the Commissions of the Saeima, a group of not less than five members of the Saeima as well as, under such circumstances and in the mode provided by this Constitution, by one-tenth of the voters. Every year prior to the commencement of the 32

67. 68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

fiscal year, the Saeima shall consider the State revenue and expenditure estimates, plans for which are to be submitted by the Cabinet of Minister. If the Saeima shall adopt a budget which shall contain unforeseen expenditures, then the Saeima must also indicate the sources from which such expenditures are to be covered. After expiration of the fiscal year the Cabinet of Ministers must submit to the Saeima for confirmation the accounts concerning the execution of the budget. In the time of peace the Saeima shall fix the strength of the armed forces of the State. All international treaties bearing upon questions which are to be regulated by legislation require the sanction of the Saeima. The President of State shall publish the laws passed by the Saeima not before the seventh day after a law has been passed, and not later than on the twenty-first day after it has been passed. The law shall come into force a fortnight after its publication, unless another time is provided in the law. The President of State shall publish the laws passed in the following way: "The Saeima (or the people) passed, and the President of State published, the following: (follows the text of the law). Within seven days after a law has been passed by the Saeima the President of State may apply to the President of the Saeima for a revision of such law, stating his reasons for such a request in writing. If the Saeima refrains from altering the law, the President of State shall raise no further objections. The President of State shall have the right to delay publication of a law for two months. He shall be required to suspend publication of a law, if requested to do so by not less than one-third of the members of the Saeima, shall be entitled to wield this right during the seven days following 33

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

the passage of the law by the Saeima. A law thus suspended must be submitted to a plebiscite, if this is requested by onetenth of the total number of voters. If no such demand is made within the above mentioned period of two months, the law must be published. A plebiscite shall not take place if such a law is once more put to a vote in the Saeima and if the Saeima shall pass it by vote of not less than three-fourths of its members. The following cannot be submitted to a plebiscite: the budget and law concerning loans, taxes, customs duties, railway tariffs, military service, declaration and commencement of war, conclusion of peace, proclamation and termination of the state of "exceptional law," mobilization and demobilization, as well as treaties entered into with foreign governments. A law passed by the Saeima and suspended in accordance with Article seventy-one, can be cancelled by a plebiscite if not less than one-half of all voters have taken part in such a plebiscite. If by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its members the Saeima shall pronounce the urgency of a law, then the President of State shall not be entitled to ask for a revision of such law nor may a plebiscite be taken on such law, and it is to be promulgated not later than three days after the adopted law has been passed on to the President. The Constitution may be amended by the Saeima in sessions which are attended by at least two-thirds of its members. Amendments shall be passed after three readings, and with not less than two-thirds of the members of the Saeima present. If the Saeima shall amend Articles one, two, three or six of the Constitution, then such amendments, in order to become valid, must be put to the plebiscite. Not less than one-tenth of the number of voters shall have the right to submit to the President of State a fully compiled bill for the amendment of the Constitution, or a 34

legislative bill, which shall be laid before the Saeima by the President. If the Saeima does not pass such bill without alteration of its contents, the bill shall be put to the plebiscite. 79. Amendments to the Constitution put to a plebiscite shall be considered as accepted if at least one-half of all votes shall be cast in their favor. All Latvian citizens who have the right of suffrage in the Saeima elections may participate in the plebiscite. In the intervals between the sessions of the Saeima the Cabinet of Ministers shall have the right, if the contingency arises to issue regulations which shall have the force of law. Such regulations, however, may not have for their object alteration of the Saeima Election Law, the law organizing administration of justice and regulating legal procedure, the budget and budget rights, nor may they alter any laws passed by the Saeima then in office; further, such regulations shall have no bearing upon amnesty, emission of currency by the State Treasury, State taxation, custom affairs, railway tariffs, and loans, and they shall become invalid if they are not laid before the Saeima not later than three days after the opening of the next session of the Saeima. PART 6. Courts of Law. 82. 83. 84. In the eyes of the law and the eyes of the court all citizens shall be equal. Judges shall be independent and subordinated solely to the law. Judges shall be confirmed in their capacity by the Saeima and they cannot be dismissed. Judges may be removed from office against
35

80.

81.

their will only on the basis of a verdict of court. The age limit at which judges shall have to resign may be fixed by law. 85. 86. Courts of law, with juries on the basis of a special law, shall exist in Latvia. Justice may be administered only by organs in which such rights are vested by law, and only in a manner provided by the law. Courts martial shall function on the basis of a special law. PART 7. State Control. 87. 88. The State Control Department shall be an independent board. State Comptrollers shall be appointed to and confirmed in their offices in a manner identical to that of judges, but only on the basis of a verdict of court. The organization and duty of the State Control Department shall be fixed by a special law. (Signed) J. CHAKSTE, President of the Constituent Assembly. (Signed) R. IVANOV, Secretary to the Constituent Assembly.

Reprinted from: Latvian-Russian Relations. Documents. Compiled by A. Bilmanis. Washington, D.C. The Latvian Legation, 1944.

36

