I. General Provisions
1. United Latvia is a Socialist Soviet Republic and joins together Lifliandia, Kurliandia and Latgalia. The division of Latvia into Lifliandia, Kurliandia and Latgalia is abolished. 
Note. Borders with the neighbouring states for now remain as before/the same. The alteration of the borders can be allowed only upon mutual agreement with those states. 
2. Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia accepts the main/basic provisions of the Constitutions of the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic (Constitution of the RSFSR, articles 9-23) without changes. Changes to the basic provisions of the Constitution of the Latvian SSR can only be introduced by the congress of the Soviets of Latvia.
II. Organisation of Central Government
3. The congress of the Soviets of the workers’ deputies of the united Latvia represents the highest authority within the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia. 
4. The congress of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia delegates the dictatorship of the proletariat of Latvia to the Soviet government of Latvia consisting of 11 members, who are elected by the Central Executive Committee of Latvia from among its members. 
5. The Central Executive Committee (CEC) of Latvia consists of 60 members, who are elected by the congress [of the Soviets] of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia until the next congress.
Note. The members of the CEC are not paid a salary as such, but receive maintenance from those organisations where they are employed. 
6. Apart from the CEC own members, chairmen - or in their absence deputy chairmen - from all county (uezd)1 executive committees are invited to the plenary sessions of the CEC of Latvia as its full members. 
7. The CEC of Latvia has a right to cancel resolutions or orders/instructions of the Soviet government, as well as a right to recall at any time the Soviet government in its entirety or its individual members. 
Note. The CEC of Latvia elaborates special provisions concerning the relationship between the CEC and the Soviet government and concerning the scope of ordinary and plenary sessions of the CEC. 
8. The Soviet government of Latvia is divided into Councils (Soviets)2 and departments or commissariats on the basis of the decisions of the CEC of Latvia.
9. The Soviet government of Latvia represents simultaneously the presidium of the CEC of Latvia.
10. The CEC of Latvia is accountable for its work to the congress of the Soviet deputies of the united Latvia. 
III. Organisation of the Local Soviet Government
11. The county Soviet of workers deputies represents local government within a county. Both city and district workers delegate their representatives to the county Soviet.  
12. The district Soviet represents local government with a district. The Soviet is elected by all the workers of the district as well as the workers of urban settlements and towns located within the district borders. 
Note. The local government of the main city of a county is the Soviet of the county. 
13. Both county as well as district Soviets elect their own executive committees. 
14. The county executive committee represents simultaneously the local government in the cities of the county, and at the same time it is the highest governing body for the district executive committees and Soviets. 
15. The county executive committee is accountable to the county Soviet, the district executive committee – to the district Soviet. 
16. The county Soviet or executive committee has a right to cancel any orders and resolutions of the district Soviets and their executive committees. 
17. The CEC of Latvia has a right to cancel any resolutions and orders of the county Soviets and their executive committees. 
IV. Electoral Norms
18. 1 deputy from every 2,000 people3 is elected to the congress of the Soviets of Latvia. Moreover, every district and every country capital (main city of the county) delegate at least 1 deputy. 
19. 1 deputy from every 1,000 voters is elected to the county Soviet. 
20. 1 deputy from every 100 voters is elected to the district Soviet. 
Note. Districts where number of voters is less than 100 are joined together.  
21. The county executive committee is comprised of 7 to 9 members. 
22. The district executive committee is comprised of 3 to 7 members.
Note. Exceptions from these electoral norms to the executive committees are permitted only for Riga and Libava counties. Further exceptions depend on the CEC of Latvia, which has a right to change other electoral norms as well. The election norms for Riga and Libava counties are developed by the CEC of Latvia in collaboration with executive committees of those counties. 
23. The Latvia Riflemen4 take part in elections according to the same procedure as the workers. 
Note. The provisions for the Latvia Riflemen participation in the elections are to be elaborated by the CEC of Latvia. 
V. Electoral Rights and Voting Procedure
24. The electoral rights to the congress, to the Soviets and executive committees, i.e. the right to vote and be elected, are reserved for the citizens of both sexes and over the age of 18.
The electoral rights are withheld from:
a) persons who use hired labour or, more generally, use other person’s labour for the purposes of exploitation;
b) persons who live on proceedings from capital, on revenues from an enterprise, property rents, profits from trade and speculation and from the proceeds of someone else’s work; as well as priests and missionaries and their assistants, former policemen, members of gendarmerie and aristocracy; 
c) those who are mentally ill and in care;
d) those from whom the right to vote has been withdrawn by decision of a court or other agency of revolutionary struggle.
25. The voting procedure is to be elaborated by the CEC of Latvia on the basis of the above. 
VI. Local and Central Budgets
26. Income and expenditure budget (the budget) of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia is compiled by the CEC of Latvia on the basis of the general provisions of the Constitution of the RSFSR.
27. Districts and counties have a right to collect taxes on the basis of the procedure established by the CEC of Latvia, in the districts – only upon the approval of the Soviet authorities of the county. 
28. All district and county revenues are paid into the central budget of the Republic of Latvia, whereupon these are redistributed to the local authorities according to the latters’ budget expenditures. 
29. The county budget is adopted by the Soviet government. The district budget is adopted by the county executive committee. The budget approval procedure is carried out on the basis of the resolutions and regulations of the CEC of Latvia. 
VII. Flag and Coat of Arms of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia
30. The Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia has a red flag displaying lettering ‘SSRL’ or words ‘Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia’. 
31. The coat of arms of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia is comprised of a red star – with a sickle and hammer within a gearwheel - in the centre, circumscribed with the words ‘Socialist Soviet Republic of Latvia’ and ‘Workers of the world, unite!’.
15 January 1919
1 Translator’s note: ‘Uezd’ – can be translated either as a ‘county’ or as a ‘district’. I use ‘county’ for ‘uezd’ here and throughout. Later in Section III there are references to ‘volost’, which is an administrative unit of uezd. I translate ‘volost’’ as a district.  
2 TN: Soviet means a council. Here they probably actually mean councils within a government rather than Soviets, but the word Soviet is still capitalized.
3 TN: The text here says: ‘people’ – I guess meaning ‘voters’, rather than ‘population’ more generally. 
4 TN: A regiment of riflemen that fought on the side of the Bolsheviks during the Bolshevik revolution in October 1917.