
                 
                     
                                      PART ONE 
                        FUNDAMENTAL 	PROVISIONS 
Chapter One 
The state and its territory 
Article 1 
Greater Lebanon is an independent and indivisible state. Its frontiers are the present ones 
which are officially recognised by the Mandatory French Government and by the League of Nations. 
Article 2 
No part of the Lebanese territory may be alienated or ceded. 
Article 3 
The boundaries of the administrative areas may not be modified except by law. 
Article 4 
Greater Lebanon is a Republic, the capital of which is Beirut. 
Article 5  
The Lebanese flag is composed of three equal vertical stripes, blue, white and red, with the 
cedar in the white stripe. 


Chapter Two 
The Lebanese: their rights and duties 

Article 6 
Lebanese nationality and, the manner in which it is acquired, retained, and lost 
shall be determined in accordance with the law. 
Article 7 
All Lebanese shall be equal before the law. They shall equally enjoy civil and political rights and shall equally be bound by public obligations and duties without 
any distinction. 
Article 8 
Individual liberty is guaranteed and protected by law. No one may be arrested, 
imprisoned, or kept in custody except according to the provisions of the law. No offence may be established or penalty imposed except by law. 
Article 9 
There shall be absolute freedom of conscience. The state, in rendering homage to 
the God Almighty shall respect all religions and creeds, and shall guarantee under              
its protection the free exercise of all religious rites provided that the public order is not disturbed. It shall also guarantee that the personal status and religious interests 
of the population, to whatever religious sect they belong, shall be respected. 
Article 10 
Education shall be free in so far as it is not contrary to public order and morals, and 
does not affect the dignity of any of the religions or sects. There shall be no 
violation of the right of religious communities to have their own schools, provided 
they follow the general rules issued by the state regulating public instruction. 
Article 11 
Arabic shall be the official national language in all the departments of the state. French shall 
also be an official language and a law shall determine the cases in which it can be used. 
Article 12 
Every Lebanese shall have the right to hold public office; no preference shall be 
made except on the basis of merit and competence, according to the conditions 
established by law. 
  A special statute shall guarantee the rights of civil servants in the departments to 
which they belong. 
Article 13 
The freedom to express one's opinion orally or in writing, the freedom of the press, 
the freedom of assembly, and the freedom of association shall be guaranteed within 
the limits established by law. 
Article 14 
The place of residence is inviolable. No one may enter it except in the 
circumstances and manners prescribed by law. 
Article 15 
Rights of ownership shall be protected by law. No one's property may be 
expropriated except for reasons of public utility, in the cases established by law 
and after fair compensation has been paid beforehand. 




        PART TWO 
          POWERS 
             
        
Chapter One 
General provisions 
Article 16 
The legislative power shall be vested in two chambers, the Senate and the Chamber of 
Deputies. 
Article 17 
Executive power shall be entrusted to the President of the Republic who shall exercise it 
assisted by the ministers in accordance with conditions stated in this Constitution. 
Article 18 
The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of elected members; their number and method 
of their election shall be determined by the electoral laws in effect.  
Article 19 
In principle, no law may be published until it has been adopted by the two Chambers. But 
the bills proposed by the Government and ratified by the Chamber, or initiated and voted 
by the Chamber in agreement with the Government, shall not be presented to the Senate except if it so desires. The above mentioned laws shall be made known to the Senate. If the Senate desires to discuss them, it must notify the Government within eight days. If within this period the Senate does not take any action, the bills shall be considered approved. 
Article 20 
The judicial power shall be exercised by courts of various degrees and 
jurisdictions. It shall function within the limits of an order established by the 
law and offering accordingly the necessary guarantees to the judges and to 
litigants. 
  The law shall determine the conditions and limits of the judicial guarantees. The 
judges shall be independent in the exercise of their functions. The decisions and 
judgments of all courts shall be rendered and executed in the name of the Lebanese 
people. 
Article 21 
Every Lebanese citizen aged 21 or more is an elector provided he fulfils the 
conditions stated by the electoral law. 


Chapter Two 
Legislative power 
Article 22 
The Senate shall be composed of 16 members, seven of whom shall be appointed by the 
Prime Minister in consultation with the ministers. The remaining nine shall be elected. The term of Senators shall be six years, after which they shall be eligible for re-election or re- appointment. 
Article 23 
It shall be required that a member of the Senate must be a Lebanese citizen of 35 years of 
age. But it is not required for the validity of his election or appointment as a member of the 
Senate that he should be residing in Greater Lebanon during the elections. A special law 
shall be drawn up to deal with the appointment of electoral districts, the requirements, and 
the methods of election. 
Article 24 
The Members of the Chamber of Deputies shall be elected in accordance with Order No. 
1307 dated 8 March 1922. The Order shall stay in force until the legislative power enact a 
new electoral law. 

Article 25  
Should the Chamber of Deputies be dissolved, the decision of dissolution must call upon the 
electors to take part in new elections which must take place within a period not exceeding 
three months. 


Chapter Three 
General provisions 
Article 26 
The Government and the Parliament shall be located in Beirut. 
Article 27 
A member of the Chamber shall represent the whole nation. No restriction or condition may 
be imposed upon his mandate by his electors or by the power that appoints him. 

Article 28  
A deputy or a senator may at the same time occupy a ministerial position. However, the 
number of ministers taken from the two Chambers must not exceed three. 

Article 29 
The deputy who is elected or appointed senator and the senator who is elected a deputy 
must choose between the two offices within eight days of his receiving the decision of his appointment or the declaration of his election. In case of silence or delay, he shall be 
considered to have chosen the new office. 
  The other cases of incompatibility and ineligibility for Parliament shall be determined by 
law. 
Article 30 
Each of the two Chambers shall have exclusive competence to judge the validity of the 
mandate of its own members. No mandate may be invalidated except by a majority of two- thirds of the votes of the entire Assembly. 

Article 31 
Ordinary and extraordinary sessions shall be the same for both Chambers. All meetings of 
both or any of them outside the legal sessions shall be unlawful and ipsofacto null and void. 
Article 32 
The two Chambers shall meet each year in two ordinary sessions. The first ordinary session 
shall open on the first Tuesday following 15 March and shall continue its meetings until the 
end of May. The second ordinary session shall begin on the first Tuesday following 15 October; its meetings shall be reserved to the discussion of, and voting on the budget before any other work. This session shall last for sixty days. 
Article 33 
The ordinary sessions shall begin and end automatically on the dates fixed in Article 32. The 
President of the Republic may summon the Chamber to extraordinary sessions. The dates of 
the opening and closing of the extraordinary sessions shall be determined by decree. The 
agenda of the extraordinary session shall be fixed by the decree of convocation. The President of the Republic shall be required to convene the Chambers if the majority of the two Chambers or two-thirds of the deputies so request. 
Article 34 
Neither of the Chambers shall be validly constituted unless more than half the total 
membership is present. Decisions shall be taken by a majority vote. Should the votes be equal, the question under consideration shall be rejected. 
Article 35 
The meetings of the Chambers shall be public. However, at the request of the Government 
or five of its members, each Chamber shall meet in secret session. It may then decide whether to resume the discussion of the same question in public. 
Article 36 
Votes shall be cast verbally or by the members rising and sitting, except in case of 
elections when the ballot shall be secret. With respect to laws in general and on 
questions of confidence, the vote shall always be taken by roll-call and in an 
audible voice. 
Article 37  
Every deputy shall have the absolute right to raise the question of no-confidence during the 
two ordinary sessions. Discussion of, and voting on such a proposal may not take place until 
at least five days after its deposit with the Bureau of the Chamber and its communication to 
the minister concerned. The same procedure shall be followed in the Senate. 
  Unless one of the ministers requests a vote of confidence, neither Chamber may do so except during ordinary sessions. 
Article 38 
No bill which has been rejected by the Parliament may be re-introduced during the same 
session. 
Article 39 
No member of either Chamber may be prosecuted because of ideas and opinions expressed 
during the period of his mandate. 



Article 40 
No member of either Chamber may, during the sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for a 
criminal offence without the permission of the Chamber to which he belongs, except when caught in the act. 
Article 41  
Should a seat in either Chamber become vacant, the election of a successor or his 
appointment, depending on the case, shall begin within two months. The mandate of the 
new member shall not exceed that of the old member whose place he is taking. However, 
should a vacancy occur in a seat in either Chamber during the last six months of its mandate, 
no successor may be elected. 
Article 42 
General elections for the renewal of the Chambers and the nominations of the appointed 
senators shall take place within a sixty-day period preceding the expiration of their mandate. 
Article 43 
Each Chamber shall draw up its own internal rules of procedures. 
Article 44 
At the opening of the October session, each of the two Chambers shall meet under the 
presidency of its oldest member and the secretariat of the two youngest. It shall separately 
elect by a secret ballot and by an absolute majority of the votes cast its President, Vice 
President, and two secretaries. Upon a third ballot, a relative majority is sufficient. Should 
the votes be equal, the oldest candidate shall be considered elected. 
Article 45 
Members of the two Chambers may only vote when they are present at the meeting. Voting 
by proxy shall not be permitted. 
Article 46 
Each of the two Chambers shall have the exclusive right to maintain order at its meetings 
through its President. 
Article 47 
All petitions to either Chamber must be presented in writing only. They may not be 
presented verbally or at the bar of the Chamber. 
Article 48 
The remuneration of members of the two Chambers shall be determined by law. 

Chapter Four 
Executive power 


The President of the Republic 
Article 49  
The President of the Republic shall be elected by secret ballot and a two-thirds majority of the 
total votes of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies joined in a Parliamentary Assembly. 
After the first ballot, an absolute majority shall be sufficient. He shall be elected for a term of 
three years. He may not be re-elected for a third term until three years have elapsed since the date of expiration of his last mandate. No one may be elected to the Presidency of the 
Republic unless he fulfils the conditions of eligibility for the Chamber of Deputies. 

Article 50 
Upon assuming office, the President of the Republic shall take an oath of fidelity, 
before the Parliament, to the Nation and the Constitution, in the following terms: 
I swear by Almighty God to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Lebanese Nation 
and to maintain the independence of Lebanon and its territorial integrity. 
Article 51  
The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws after they have been approved by 
the two Chambers or by the Chamber of Deputies within the conditions stated in Article 9. 
He shall assure their execution on the basis of the organisational power granted to him. He may not modify these laws or exempt anyone from complying with their provisions. He shall have the right to pardon. However, amnesties may not be granted except by law. 


Article 52 
In accordance with Article 3 of the Mandate Pact, the President of the Republic shall 
negotiate and ratify international treaties. He shall make them known to the two Chambers 
whenever the interest and safety of the state permit. However, treaties involving the 
finances of the state, commercial treaties, and in general treaties which cannot be 
denounced every year shall not be considered ratified until they have been approved by the 
two Chambers. 
 
Article 53  
The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss ministers from among whom he 
shall designate a Prime Minister. He shall appoint a number of deputies as provided in 
Article 22. He shall appoint officials to state posts except where the law specifies other methods of appointment. He shall preside over official ceremonies. 
Article 54 
The decisions of the President of the Republic must be countersigned by the minister or 
ministers concerned except when ministers are designated or dismissed. 
Article 55 
The President of the Republic may, with the approval of the Council of Ministers and with 
that of the Senate taken by a three-quarters majority of its total membership, issue a 
Decision with the reasons specified, dissolving the Chamber of Deputies, before the legal expiration of its mandate. The reasons enabling the President of the Republic to dissolve the 
Chamber are: 
1) The refusal of the Chamber to meet in an ordinary or extraordinary session, although it 
    has been called to convene by the President of the Republic for two consecutive times. 
2) In case of the rejection by the Chamber of the whole budget in an attempt to paralyse 
    the machinery of the Government. 
3) In case the Chamber adopts decisions liable to raise the country against the constitution 
  or the mandate. 
  In that case the electoral bodies shall meet as provided for in Article 25. The new 
Chamber shall be called to convene within ten days after the proclamation of the results of the election. 
  The Chamber of Deputies may not be dissolved a second time for the same reasons for 
which it has been dissolved in the first time. 


Article 56  
The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws, which have been definitely 
adopted, within one month of their transmission to the Government. As for the laws that 
were declared urgent by a special decision of either Chamber, he must promulgate them 
within five days.               
               
Article 57 
The President of the Republic shall have the right to request the reconsideration of a law 
once during the period prescribed for its promulgation. This request may not be refused. When the President of the Republic exercises this right, he shall not be required to promulgate the law until it has been reconsidered and approved by an absolute majority of the members composing each Chamber. 
Article 58 
Should the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate disagree upon a bill, the President of the 
Republic may call them to a General Assembly to discuss the bill. If the bill is approved by an absolute majority of the total membership of the joined bodies, it shall be considered 
adopted and the President of the Republic shall promulgate it. 
Article 59  
The President of the Republic may adjourn the Chambers for a period not exceeding one 
month. He may not do so twice during the same session. 
Article 60 
While performing his functions, the President of the Republic shall not be held responsible 
except when he violates the Constitution and in the case of high treason. 
  However, responsibility with respect to ordinary crimes shall be subject to the ordinary laws. For such crimes, as well as for violation of the Constitution and for high treason, he 
may not be impeached except by a two-thirds majority decision of the total members of the Chamber of Deputies. He may not be tried except by the Supreme Council provided for in 
Article 80. The functions of public prosecutor at the Supreme Council shall be performed by two judges appointed every year by the Court of Cassation during its General Assembly. 
Article 61 
Should the President of the Republic be impeached, he shall be suspended from 
his functions. The Presidency shall remain vacant until the Supreme Council has 
settled the matter. 
Article 62  
Should there be a vacancy in the Presidency for any reason whatsoever, the Council of 
Ministers shall exercise the executive power by delegation. 

Article 63 
The remuneration of the President of the Republic shall be determined by a law. 
It may not be increased or reduced during his term of office. 


The Prime Minister 
Article 64 
Ministers shall administer the services of the State and shall be entrusted with the 
application of laws and regulations, each within his department and in so far as he is concerned. 


The Council of Ministers 
Article 65 
Only Lebanese may be appointed to the Ministry. 
Article 66 
Ministers shall be individually responsible to the Chambers for their personal actions. The 
Government's statement of policy shall be drawn up and presented to the Chamber by the Prime Minister or by a minister acting on his behalf. 
Article 67  
Ministers may attend the two Chambers if they so desire and they shall have the right to be 
heard whenever they request to speak. They may be assisted by whomever they select from 
among the officials of their departments. 
Article 68 
When either of the Chambers, in accordance with Article 37 passes a vote of no confidence 
in a minister, that minister shall be required to resign. 
                                                                
Article 69 
No decision of no confidence in a minister may be adopted unless at least three-quarters of 
the members of the Chamber are present. But if the minister himself raises the question of 
confidence, the ordinary quorum shall be sufficient. 
 
Article 70 
The Chamber of Deputies shall have the right to impeach the ministers for high treason or 
for breach of their duties. The decision of impeachment may not be taken except by a two- 
thirds majority of the total members of the Chamber. A special law shall be issued to 
determine the conditions of the civil liability of ministers. 
               
Article 71 
The impeached minister shall be tried by the Supreme Council. 
Article 72 
The minister shall leave office as soon as the decision of impeachment concerning him is 
issued. If he resigns, his resignation shall not prevent judicial proceedings from being instituted or continued against him. 


                                PART THREE 
                                    
                        
Election of the President of the Republic 
Article 73 
One month at least and two months at most before the expiration of the term of office of the 
President of the Republic, the President of the Senate shall convene the two Chambers in a joint Parliamentary Assembly to elect the new President of the Republic. However, should they not be convened for this purpose, the two Chambers shall automatically meet on the 
tenth day preceding the expiration of the President's term of office. 

Article 74 
Should the Presidency become vacant through the death or resignation of the President or 
for any other cause, the Chambers shall meet immediately and by virtue of the law to elect a 
successor. If either Chamber happens to be dissolved at the time the vacancy occurs, the 
electoral bodies shall be convened without delay and as soon as the elections have taken place, the Chambers shall meet by virtue of the law. 

Article 75 
The Parliamentary Assembly meeting to elect the President of the Republic shall be 
considered an electoral body and not a legislative assembly. It must proceed immediately, without discussion of any other act, to elect the Head of the State. 


Amendment of the Constitution 
Article 76 
The two Chambers may, directly or upon the suggestion of the President of the Republic, 
decide upon the revision of the Constitution. A decision to this effect must be separately 
adopted by each Chamber by a two-thirds absolute majority of the members of that Chamber. This decision shall specify the subjects to be revised and indicate them clearly. 
Article 77 
When the two Chambers agree on the articles to be revised, they shall meet in a 
Parliamentary Assembly to discuss these revisions. No decision may be adopted unless it 
secures thirty-one votes. 
                                          
                   
Procedure of the Chamber of Deputies 
Article 78 
The President of the Senate shall preside over the Parliamentary Assembly. The bureau of 
the Senate shall be the Bureau of the Parliamentary Assembly. 
Article 79 
The Parliamentary Assembly shall not be validly constituted unless an absolute majority of 
the membership of each Chamber are present. The resolutions shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of those present except where it has been stated otherwise in Articles 49 and 77. 
 


             PART FOUR 
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
 
The Supreme Council 
Article 80  
The Supreme Council shall consist of seven Senators elected by the Senate and of eight of 
the highest Lebanese judges, according to their rank in the judicial hierarchy, or in case of 
equal rank, in the order of seniority. They shall meet under the presidency of the judge of 
the highest rank. The decisions of condemnation by the Supreme Council shall be rendered by a majority of ten votes. A special law shall be issued to determine the procedure to be 
followed by this Council. 


Finances 
Article 81 
Public taxes shall be imposed for public utility. No taxes shall be levied in Greater Lebanon except by a comprehensive law which shall apply to the entire Lebanese territory without exception. A special law shall be promulgated unifying financial taxes amongst all the 
inhabitants of the territory of Greater Lebanon. 
Article 82 
No tax may be modified or abolished except by virtue of law. 
Article 83 
Each year at the beginning of the October session, the Government shall submit to 
the Chamber of Deputies the general budget estimates of state expenditures and 
revenues for the following year. The budget shall be voted upon article by article. 
Article 84 
All propositions of laws involving a new expenditure, and every expenditure established or 
added to the budget or taken from the reserves, and any suppression or reduction of credit 
already earmarked in the budget may not be approved except by an absolute majority of the 
total membership in each of the two Chambers. 
Article 85 
No extraordinary or supplementary credit may be opened except by a special law. Should 
the government find it necessary to have extraordinary or supplementary credits during the 
recess of the two Chambers it must convoke them immediately. 

Article 86 
If the two Chambers have not approved the budget by the opening of the final year, taxes, 
charges, duties, imposts, and other kinds of revenues shall continue to be collected as before. 
The budget of the previous year shall be adopted as a basis. To this must be added the 
permanent supplementary credits, and from it must be deducted the permanent credits which have been dropped. The government shall draw its expenditures month by month 
using the "provisional twelfth" as a basis. 
Article 87 
The final financial accounts of the Administration for each year must be submitted to the 
two Chambers for approval before the promulgation of the budget of the second year which 
follows that year. A special law shall be issued for the setting up of an Audit office. 
Article 88 
No public loan or undertaking involving an expenditure from the treasury funds 
may be contracted except by virtue of a law. 
Article 89 
No contract or concession for the exploitation of the natural resources of the 
country or a public utility service, and no monopoly may be granted, except by 
virtue of a law and for a limited period. 


                            PART FIVE 
      PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE MANDATORY POWER 
                     AND THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS 
Article 90 
The provisions adopted in this Constitution shall be in force in addition to the preservation 
of the rights and duties of the Mandatory Power in accordance with Article 22 of the 
Covenant of the League of Nations and the Act of Mandate. 
Article 91 
When circumstances permit, and with the help of the Mandatory Power, the government of 
Greater Lebanon shall apply for a seat in the League of Nations. 
Article 92 
In this Constitution, the Lebanese Republic affirms its good intentions for the preservation 
of peace and concord with all states, especially those neighbouring states which are under 
the French Mandate. With these states Lebanon wishes to strengthen its bonds of friendship 
in an atmosphere of reciprocal cordiality. 
Article 93 
According to this Constitution, the Lebanese Republic shall be under obligation to submit 
for the arbitration of the Mandatory Power in all conflicts that may disturb peace and 
security. Therefore, the Lebanese Republic shall be willing to conclude agreements with its 
neighbouring and other states who desire to do so, provided these agreements include a clear statement binding all parties to the obligatory arbitration in all conflicts. 
Article 94 
The Lebanese Government shall, later on, agree with the representative of the Mandatory 
Power upon the establishment of a Lebanese delegation in Paris and of posts of Lebanese 
attaches with the French diplomatic delegations and consulates in foreign cities where the 
number of Lebanese residents make it necessary. 
  The French government shall do its utmost to strengthen the ties between the Lebanese 
emigrants and their native country. 


                PART SIX 
              FINAL AND TEMPORARY PROVISIONS 
Article 95 
As a provisional measure and according to Article one ofthe Charter of the Mandate and for 
the sake of justice and amity, the sects shall be equitably represented in public employment 
and in the composition of the Ministry, provided such measures will not harm the general 
welfare of the state. 
Article 96 
According to Articles 22 and 95, the seats of the Senate shall be distributed among the sects 
as follows: 
  5 Maronites; 3 Sunnis; 3 Shi'ia, 3 Orthodox; 1 Catholic; I Druze; 1 minorities. 
Article 97 
The present Representative Assembly, after ratifying this Constitution, shall continue its 
functions until the expiration of its term. It will be called the Chamber of Deputies. 
Article 98 
In order to facilitate the immediate implementation and guarantee the full execution of this 
Constitution, the French High Commissioner shall be given the right to appoint the first Senate to be composed in accordance with Articles 22 and 96, for a period extending only to 
the end of the year 1928. 
Article 99 
When the High Commissioner convokes the newly established Senate for the first time, it 
must proceed to elect a President, a Vice President and two Secretaries, in accordance with 
Article 44 of this Constitution. This procedure is to be followed every time the election of 
the Senate is renewed. The Chamber of Deputies shall also elect, in accordance with Article 
44, its body of officials each time it is convoked after the renewal of its election. 
  The term of the bodies thus elected in both Chambers must extend only to the session of the following October. 
Article 100 
Within one month of the establishment of the Senate, the President of the Senate shall 
convoke the Parliamentary Assembly to elect the President of the Republic. 
Article 101 
Beginning 1 September 1926 the State of Greater Lebanon shall be known as The 
Lebanese Republic without any other change or modification. 

Article 102 
This Constitution shall be entrusted to the French Republic in its capacity of being 
mandated by the League of Nations. All legislative provisions contrary to the present Constitution shall be abrogated. 
