CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables VOLUME II FRANCE to POLAND

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, former President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), UNITED NATIONS GOVERNMENT (Putnams, 1945), and coauthor of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1950 by Amos J. PEASLEE

THE RUMFORD PRESS CONCORD, N. H.

CONSTITUTION of the PRINCIPALITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN
October 5, 19211
WE, JOHANN II, by the grace of God, Sovereign Prince at Liechtenstein, Duke of Troppau, Count of Rietberg, etc., proclaim herewith that the Constitution of September 26, 1862, has been changed by us, with the consent of our Diet, to read as follows:
CHAPTER I

The Principality Art. 1. The Principality of Liechtenstein constitutes, by the union of both its country sections of Vaduz and Schellenberg, an indivisible and inalienable whole; the country of Vaduz (upper country) consists of the communities of Vaduz, Balzers, Planken, Schaan, Triesen, and Triesenberg; the country of Schellenberg (lower country) consists of the communities of Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Ruggell, and Schellenberg. Vaduz is the capital and seat and place of office of the authorities of the country. Art. 2. The Principality is a constitutional, hereditary monarchy upon democratic and parliamentary basis (Articles 79 and 80) ; the power of the State is inherent and anchored in, and issues from, the Prince and the people and shall be exercised by both of them in accordance with the provisions of the present Constitution. Art. 3. The succession to the throne, hereditary in the princely house of Liechtenstein, the coming of age of the Prince of the country and of the princely heir apparent, as well as, when the occasion therefor arises, the respective guardianship, are to be determined by the laws of the princely house governing in respect thereof. Art. 4. Any change in the boundaries of the territory of the State or of individual communities thereof, the creation of new and the consolidation of existing communities may take place by reason of a law only. Art. 5. The coat of arms of the State is that of the princely house of Liechtenstein; the national colors are blue and red. Art. 6. The German language is the state and official language.
CHAPTER II

Of the Prince of the Country Art. 7. The Prince of the country is the head of the State and he exercises his rights relative to the power of the State in conformity with

the provisions of the present Constitution and of the other pertinent laws. His person is sacred and inviolable. Art. 8. The Prince of the country shall represent the State in all its relations to foreign states, without prejudice to the necessary co-operation of the government. All treaties by which any part of the territory of the State is ceded or property belonging to the State is alienated, or by which any disposition is made as to sovereign rights of the State or as to state rights and privileges of an authoritative and proprietary nature [Staats-Regale], or by which there is either assumed a new encumbrance to rest upon the principality or its citizens, or an obligation is to be entered into infringing upon the rights of the citizens of the State, shall require for their validity the consent of the Diet. Art. 9. Every law, in order to be valid, requires approval and sanction by the Prince of the country. Art. 10. The Prince of the country shall make without the co-operation of the Diet, through the government, all dispositions necessary for executing and administering the laws as well as the dispositions flowing from the rights of administration and control, and he shall issue the decrees and orders pertinent thereto (Article 92). In cases of emergency he shall provide for any steps necessary to be taken for the safety and the welfare of the State. Art. 11. The Prince shall appoint the officials of the State in conormity with the provisions of this Constitution. New and permanent f positions of officials may be created only with the consent of the Diet. Art. 12. To the Prince belong the rights to pardon, to mitigate, and to commute sentences pronounced, when finally and legally valid, and to stay the course of criminal proceedings. The Prince shall exercise his right to pardon or to reduce punishments in favor of a member of the government who has been convicted of official acts, only upon application by the Diet. Art. 13. Every successor as Prince, prior to administering the oath of fealty due to him, shall declare in a written document, upon his princely honor and dignity, that he will govern the Principality of Liechtenstein in conformity with its Constitution and its other laws, preserve its territorial Integrity, and in like manner exercise indivisibly all the rights of the principality. The Prince, in case of prolonged absence from the country, shall send hither each year, for a fixed period and also for particular cases, a Prince B elonging to his house and shall entrust to him, as his deputy, the exercise f the sovereign princely rights.
CHAPTER III

Of the Duties of the State

Art. 14. The supreme duty of the State is to advance the public welare. For this purpose the State shall provide for the issuance and observance of the laws and for the protection of the religious, moral, and economic interests of the people. Art. 15. The State shall give particular attention to public instruction end education. This shall be organized in such a manner that the youth

shall receive, from the co-operation of family, school, and church, religious and moral training, patriotic feeling, and professional capacity. Art. 16. The whole system of education and instruction, without prejudice to the inviolability of the doctrine of the Church, is subject to the control of the State. There shall obtain the system of general and compulsory education. The State shall see to it that the compulsory instruction in the elementary subjects shall be given in sufficient measure and free of charge in public schools. The instruction in religious matters shall be given by the ecclesiastical authorities. Nobody may leave any member of the youth subject to his control without the extent of instruction prescribed for the public elementary schools. Attendance upon night schools may be made compulsory. The State shall exercise the supreme discretion inherent in the State of the affairs of education and instruction through the school council of the country, the organization and tasks of which shall be determined by law. Private instruction is admissible when conforming to the legal provisions concerning the time of schooling, the objects and ends of instruction, and! the organization and equipment of public schools. Art. 17. The State aids and fosters the system of continuation schools and of high-schools with special training in matters of science [Realschulen] as well as the whole system of education and instruction in matters of home economics, agriculture, and industry. The State will facilitate to gifted pupils, when being without means, their attendance at schools of higher education and instruction by the grant of appropriate scholarships. Art. 18. The State shall attend to the public health system, aid the system of sickness support, and strive, by legal means, to combat the drinking habit as well as to reform drinkers and vagrants. Art. 19. The State protects the right to work and to use one's working power, in particular concerning women and adolescent persons employed in trade and industry. Sunday and the public holidays recognized by the State shall be public days of rest, without prejudice to the legal regulations as to Sundays and holidays. Art. 20. The State shall sponsor and support lowland and highland agriculture, trades, and industries for the purpose of improving the earning capacities of the people and fostering its own economic interests ; it shall; in particular, promote insurance against such damage as threatens work and goods, and take measures for combating such damage. The State shall take particular care to develop such an organization of traffic as will conform to modern requirements. It shall aid the dam-system, reforestation, and draining, and shall pay attention to, and further, all efforts to open new sources of earnings. Art. 21. In the State are inherent the supreme sovereign rights and prerogatives as to all waters in conformity with the laws existing and those to be issued in relation thereto. The use of, conducting of, and protection from waters shall be regulated and advanced by means of laws with due regard for technical developments. Rights with respect to elec. tricity are subject to regulation.

Art. 22. The State exercises its supreme sovereign rights as to hunting, fishing, and mining, and shall protect, when enacting the laws relating thereto, the interests of agriculture as well as the finances of the communities. Art. 23. The organization of the currency and public credits system is the concern of the State. Art. 24. The State, by means of laws to be issued, provides for a just taxation, while leaving exempt a minimum amount necessary for existence and subjecting to higher taxes property and income in the higher grades. The financial condition of the State shall be brought to a higher level by all possible means, and particular consideration shall be given to the opening of new sources of revenue for the purposes of defraying the costs of the public exigencies. Art. 25. To provide for the public poor relief is the concern of the communities in accordance with the special laws governing in relation thereto. The State, however, shall exercise the supreme control in that respect. It may give proper support to the communities, in particular for the purposes of adequately providing for orphans, mentally defective persons, incurables, and for cases of infirmity on account of old age. Art. 26. The State shall aid and foster the system of insurance against illness, old age, disability, and damage by fire. Art. 27. The State provides for a system of rapid litigation and excutionprd, gtoprechulsfbtanivew,l s for a system of legal proceedings pertaining to administrative law based n the same principles. The professional representation of parties shall be subject to regulation by law.
CHAPTER IV

Of the Common Rights and Duties of the Citizens of the Country Art. 28. Every citizen of the country has the right, subject to the governing legal rules, to take his residence freely at any place within the territory of the State and to acquire property of any kind. The rights of foreigners to residence are determined by the treaties of ,,he State or on the basis of reciprocity. Any stay within the territory of the Principality is subject to the obervance of its laws and shall give rise to protection according to the provisions contained in the Constitution and all other laws. Art. 29. Every person, being a citizen of the country, shall have all the Rights of citizenship in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution. Art. 30. Acquisition and loss of citizenship shall be determined by law. Art. 31. All citizens of the State are equal before the law. They shall be equally admitted to all public offices in accordance with the respective laws. The rights of foreigners shall be determined in the first place by treaties and, in default of any treaty, on the basis of reciprocity. Art. 32. The liberty of the person, the immunity of the home and the inviolability of letters and writings are guaranteed. Except in the cases and in the manner determined by law, nobody may arrested or kept in custody, nor may any search of homes or persons, letters or writings, or a seizure of letters or writings, be made.

There shall be a claim for full compensation, to be paid by the State and to be determined by the courts, on behalf of anybody who has been arrested illegally, or innocently, as proved by evidence, and on behalf of anybody who is convicted when innocent. The laws shall determine whether, and to what extent, the State shall have a claim for reimbursement against third parties. Art. 33. Nobody may be deprived of his usual judge. Extraordinary courts must not be instituted. Only in conformity with the laws may penalties be threatened or imposed. In all criminal proceedings, the right of the person accused to have a defender is guaranteed. Art. 34. The inviolability of private property is guaranteed; confiscations may take place only in such cases as are determined by law. Copyright shall be regulated by law. Art. 35. Whenever public welfare demands, the surrender of property or its encumbrance in any manner may be ordered against appropriate compensation, to be determined in case of contest by the courts. The right of eminent domain shall be determined by law. Art. 36. Commerce, trade, and industry are free within the limits determined by law; the admissibility of exclusive privileges in respect thereof for a specified period of time shall be regulated by law. Art. 37. The liberty of creed and conscience is guaranteed to everybody. The Roman Catholic Church is the Church of the State and shall enjoy as such full protection by the State; to other religious denominations, the confession of their respective creeds and the performance of their religious services, within the limits of morality and public order, are guaranteed. Art. 38. The property and all other proprietary rights of the religious denominations and the religious associations and societies in regard to their respective institutions, endowments, or other properties intended for purposes of worship, education, and charity, are guaranteed. The administration of the property belonging to the Church within the respective parishes shall be regulated by a special law; prior to its enactment friendly understanding with the respective Church authorities in regard thereto shall be obtained. Art. 39. The enjoyment of civic and political rights is independent of any religious creed; the duties of citizenship must not be infringed thereby! Art. 40. Everybody has the right to freely express his opinion and communicate his thoughts by word, writing, print, or pictorial presentation within the limits of law and morality; censorship may be established only in respect of public performances and exhibitions. Art. 41. The freedom of association and assembly within the limits of the law is guaranteed. Art. 42. The right to address petitions to the Diet or to the commission for the country is guaranteed, and not only individuals affected in their rights or interests but also communities and corporations shall have the right to present their respective wishes and demands there through a member of the Diet. Art. 43. The right to bring a complaint is guaranteed. Every citizen of the country is entitled to raise a complaint in respect of any attitude of conduct of any authority of the State which is violative of the Constitu.

tion, any law or ordinance, and disadvantageously affects his rights or interests. Such complaint shall be addressed to that authority which is the immediate superior of the authority involved, and may be pursued, if necessary, to the highest authority, unless the law imposes a limitation for bringing a complaint or pursuing it further in the specific case. If the complaint is rejected by the respective authority, such authority is under obligation to communicate the grounds for its decision to the party having raised the complaint. Art. 44. Every person capable of bearing arms is obliged, up to the completion of the sixtieth year of age, to defend the country in case of need. With the exception of this case, armed formations may be created and maintained in so far only as it appears to be necessary for the performance of the services of the police and for maintaining the domestic order. The particular provisions in regard thereof shall be provided for by legislation.
CHAPTER V

Of the Diet
Art. 45. The Diet is the legal agency of the total community of the citizens of the country, and it is as such designed to attend to, and assert, in conformity with the provisions of the present Constitution, the rights and interests of the people in its relation to the government, and to promote as much as possible the welfare of the princely house and of the country, while faithfully adhering to the principles laid down in this Constitution. The rights lodged in the Diet may be exercised only in a legally constituted meeting of the same. Art. 46.' The Diet consists of fifteen deputies to be elected by the people through general, equal, secret, and direct vote and according to the proportional elective system. The upper and lower country form each a separate election district. Of the fifteen deputies, nine are elected by the upper and six by the lower country. Substitute deputies to the fifteen deputies shall be elected at the same time also by each group of electors in each election district. The total number of substitute deputies in each election district may not exceed the number of deputies to be elected in such an election district. The substitute deputies are to be apportioned according to the ratio of strength of the parties. All details with regard to the carrying out of the election shall be regulated by a special law. Art. 47. The period of election of the members of the Diet is four years; every deputy may succeed himself in another election. The assembly of the groups of electors to which an individual deputy belongs s the right, upon application by the prevailing political party of the roup of electors concerned, to call such deputy from the Diet for important grounds. Art. 48. The Prince of the country has the right, except as provided n the next paragraph, to convoke the Diet, to close it, and, upon serious ,rounds, which in each case are to be communicated to the Diet, to

adjourn it for three months or to dissolve it. Any adjournment, close, or dissolution may be pronounced only before the Diet assembled. Upon a demand by at least four hundred citizens with the right to vote, or upon a resolution of assemblies of at least three communities, in writing and containing the reasons therefor, the Diet must be convoked. Under the like circumstances as contained in the preceding paragraph, six hundred citizens with the right to vote, or four communities, upon resolutions made by their respective assemblies, may demand a plebiscite regarding the dissolution of the Diet. Art. 49. The regular convocation of the Diet occurs at the beginning of each year through an order of the Prince of the country, designating place, day, and hour of the meeting. Within the period of each year, the president of the Diet convokes its sessions. Upon the expiration of a period of adjournment, the re-convocation must occur within one month by ordinance of the Prince. The substitute deputies shall participate in the case of the absence of a deputy belonging to their respective groups of electors, in particular or several consecutive sessions, in substitution for the respective absent deputy with his respective place and vote. Art. 50. If the Diet is dissolved, a new election must be ordered within six weeks. The newly elected deputies are to be convoked within another period of fourteen days. Art. 51. In case of a succession to the throne, the Diet is to be convoked within thirty days to an extraordinary session for the purposes of receiving the declaration of the successor to the throne, as provided for in Article 13, and the administration of the oath of fealty. Where a dissolution has previously occurred, the new election shall be expedited in such manner as to make possible the convocation for at the latest the fortieth day subsequent to the change of the throne. Art. 52. The Diet shall elect, with its oldest member in the chair, in its first legally convoked session, from its members, a president and his deputy for the current year for the purposes of directing its affairs. The minutes of the sessions shall be conducted upon resolution of the Diet, either by two secretaries elected from its members, or by an official of the State. Art. 53. Upon a convocation having taken place, the deputies shall appear in person at the seat of the government. If a deputy is prevented from appearing, he shall promptly communicate the fact and the reasons therefor, in the case of the first convocation to the government, and later on to the president of the Diet. If the grounds for the prevention are permanent, a by-election shall take place unless a substitution may occur under the system of succession. Art. 54. The first session of the Diet shall be opened, with appropriate solemnity, by the Prince of the country personally or through his deputy From all the members newly entering the Diet, the Prince or his deputy respectively shall take an oath as follows: I swear to observe the Constitution of the State and the existing laws and to
foster in the Diet the welfare of the country without any private considerations or reservations to the best of my power and knowledge. So help me God!

From the members newly entering later on, this oath shall be taken by the president of the Diet.

Art. 55. The Diet shall be closed either by the Prince in person or by his deputy. Art. 56. No deputy of the Diet may be arrested during the period of its sessions without the consent of the Diet, except in the case of seizure in the commission of the very act. In the latter case, notice of the arrest must be given to the Diet immediately, while setting forth the reason therefor, and the Diet shall decide whether the arrest shall be sustained. At its demand, the entire record concerning the case must be at once placed at its disposal. If the arrest of a deputy occurs at a time when the Diet is not in session, notice thereof must be given without delay to the commission for the country, setting forth the reasons therefor. Art. 57. The members of the Diet shall cast their votes solely in consideration of the oath taken by them and in accordance with their own conviction. They are never answerable for their votes, and for any utterances made during the sessions of the Diet or of any of its commissions are answerable only to the Diet, and can never be prosecuted for them in any court. The regulation of the disciplinary power is reserved for the rules to be . issued by the Diet.	 Art. 58. Any law or other resolution passed by the Diet shall be valid only where a quorum consisting of at least two-thirds of the legally determined number of its members has been present, and the vote taken was cast by the majority of the members present, as far as nothing to the contrary is determined either in this Constitution or in the rules of the Diet. The same applies to elections to be made by the Diet. In the case of an even number of the votes cast, the chair shall cast the deciding vote: in the case of elections, after the vote has been taken thrice; in all other cases after it has been taken once. Art. 59. The Diet decides as to the validity of the election of its members. Art. 60. The Diet shall determine by resolution the rules regulating is business, while having consideration of, and adhering to, the provisions contained in this Constitution. Art. 61. The deputies shall receive from the treasury of the State for their participation in the sessions and commissions of the Diet such daily allowances and compensation for traveling expenses as may be determined y law. Art. 62. The activities of the Diet shall extend particularly to the following matters: (a) To co-operation, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, in legislation; (b) To co-operation in the conclusion of treaties of the State; (c) To the determination of the annual budget and the imposing of taxes and other public imposts; (d) To the determination by vote as to credits, securities, and loans chargeable to the country, and as to the purchase and sale-of—State property; (e) To the decision with regard to the statement of accounts to be rendered to the Diet annually by the government in respect of the entire administration of the State; (f) To the making of motions or complaints relating to the affairs of the administration, in general or involving special branches thereof:

(g) To the bringing of an impeachment against members of the government, by reason of a violation of the Constitution or of other laws, before the High Tribunal of the State. Art. 63. The Diet shall have the right of supervision of the entire administration of the State; it shall exercise this right by a commission to be elected by it, for the examination of all affairs affecting the State. The Diet, at any time, is at liberty to apprise the Prince of the country directly, either by way of representation or by complaint, of any defects or abuses found by it in the administration of the State, and to request their redress. The result of the proceedings of inquiry to be instituted relative thereto, and the decision to be taken by reason thereof, shall be communicated to the Diet. The Diet has the right to appoint commissions for the ascertainment of facts. The representative of the government must be heard and he is under obligation to answer interpellations made by deputies. Art. 64. The right of initiative in the field of legislation, i.e., to bring in a bill for a law, pertains: (a) To the Prince of the country in the form of bills to be proposed by the government; (b) To the Diet itself; (c) To the citizens of the country clothed with the voting right in accordance with the following conditions: If at least four hundred citizens of the country possessed of the voting right, whose signatures and voting right have been attested to by the local head-board of their respective domiciles in writing, or if at least three communities by resolutions, concurring in form and made by the assemblies of their respective communities, raise the request for the enactment, amendment, or revocation of a law, such request must be brought to a discussion at the next following session of the Diet. If the request made by one of the organs enumerated under (a) to (c) is directed to the enactment of a law not yet provided for by the present Constitution, from the carrying out of which the country will incur either a single encumbrance not provided for by the finance law, or one continuing for a period of time of longer duration, then such request shall be brought to a discussion by the Diet only where it contains also a proposal for covering any such encumbrances. Where the initiative concerns the Constitution itself, it may be raised only by at least six hundred citizens of the country possessed of the voting right or by at least four communities. The details relative to the said popular initiative shall be determined by a law. Art. 65. No law may be enacted, amended, or authentically construes without the co-operation of the Diet. To the validity of every law there are necessary, in addition to the concurrence of the Diet, the sanctioning signature of the Prince of the country, the counter-signature of the re. sponsible head of the government or of his deputy, and its publication it the legal gazette of the country. Furthermore, in conformity with the provisions contained in the follow ing Article, a popular vote (referendum) may take place.

Art. 66. Every law passed by the Diet, which has not been declared by the Diet to be urgent, as well as any financial resolution not declared by the Diet to be urgent, if it involves a single new expenditure of ten thousand francs, is subject to referendum if the Diet makes a resolution to that effect or if, within thirty days after the official publication of the resolution of the Diet, at least four hundred citizens of the country possessed of the voting right or at least three communities so request as provided in Article 64. Where the Constitution, in its totality, or as to particular parts thereof, is involved, such request must be made by at least six hundred citizens of the country possessed of the voting right or by at least four communities. The Diet is authorized to order a referendum for the purpose of including particular principles in a law to be enacted. The referendum shall take place by communities; the majority of valid votes cast in the whole country shall be decisive as to whether such law is carried or lost. Resolutions involving a law subject to a referendum shall not be presented to the Prince of the country for his sanctioning signature until either they have been carried by a referendum, or the period of thirty days for raising the request for a referendum has elapsed. If the Diet has rejected a proposed bill, submitted to it by way of the popular initiative and containing, if necessary, also a proposal for covering any encumbrances resulting therefrom, it must be submitted to a referendum. The passing of the proposed law by vote of the citizens of the country possessed of the voting right in such a case takes the place of the passing of a resolution by the Diet otherwise required for the passing of a law. The details as to the referendum shall be provided for by a law. Art. 67. Where nothing else has been determined in a law in that respect, it shall take effect upon the expiration of eight days after its publication in the legal gazette of the country. Art. 68. No direct or indirect tax or any other general impost or burden, whatever name it may carry, may be established or levied without the consent of the Diet. Such consent when given must be expressly referred to at the publication of the imposition of such taxes. Likewise subject to the consent of the Diet is the manner of apportioning and distributing all public imposts and performances among and upon persons and objects, as well as the manner of levying them. The granting of taxes and imposts, as a rule, shall be made for a single year of administration. Art. 69. In relation to the administration of the country, a budget setting forth the entire expenditure and revenues for the succeeding year 'of administration is to be presented by the government to the Diet for its examination and consent. The motion to have the imposts levied shall be joined to it. For each year of administration which has expired, the government shall communicate during the first six months of the succeeding year of administration to the Diet an exact statement regarding the application of the approved and levied revenues made in accordance with the budget, without prejudice to the approval by the Diet of justified excess expenditures and to the responsibility of the government as to unjustified excess expenditures.

Subject to the same proviso, the government has the right to make urgent expenditures not provided for in the budget. Savings, if any, from particular items of the budget must not be applied to any covering of excess expenditures in relation to other items. Art. 70. The Diet, concurring with the Prince of the country, has the control of the assets of the treasury of the country.
CHAPTER VI

Of the Commission for the Country Art. 71. For the period of time between an adjournment, a close or dissolution of the Diet and its re-opening, there shall, without prejudice to the provisions contained in Articles 48-57 concerning the periods of time set for its re-convocation and/or re-election, respectively, be constituted the commission for the country, to take the place of the Diet for the purposes of attending to such matters as require the co-operation of the Diet or of any of its commissions. Art. 72. The commission for the country consists of the former president of the Diet, to be replaced, in case of his being prevented from attending, by his deputy, and of four additional persons to be elected by the Diet from its membership, with equal consideration of the upper and the lower country. To the Diet, under all circumstances, must be given an opportunity to attend to this election during the session in which its adjournment, close, or dissolution is pronounced. Art. 73. The period of activities of the commission for the country expires with the re-assembling of the Diet. Art. 74. The commission for the country, in particular, is authorized and obligated: (a) To see to it that the Constitution is maintained, that the carrying out of the affairs of the Diet is attended to, and that the Diet, in the case of its preceding dissolution or adjournment, shall be re-convoked in time; (b) To examine the balance sheet of the treasury of the country and to transmit to the Diet its report and its motions; (c) To concur in signing the debt and security certificates to be made out against the treasury of the country with relation to a preceding resolution made by the Diet in that respect; (d) To attend to any particular instructions received from the Diet as to preparation for future deliberations of the Diet; (e) In urgent cases to give notice to the Prince of the country, and, where constitutional rights are menaced or violated, to make representations, protests and complaints; (f) Where the circumstances require it, to apply for the convocation of the Diet. Art. 75. The commission for the country may not enter into any permanent obligation affecting the country, and it is responsible to the Diet for its conduct. Art. 76. The sessions of the commission for the country shall take place at the seat of the government upon convocation by its president, whenever required. A quorum of at least three members is necessary for the validity of its resolutions.

Art. 77. The members of the commission for the country shall receive during the period of its sessions the same daily allowances and compensation for traveling expenses as the deputies.
CHAPTER VII

Of the Authorities of the Country A. The Government Art. 78. The administration of all the affairs of the country, with the exception of the matters referring to the schools, shall be attended to, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and the other laws, by the government in council which is responsible to the Prince of the country and to the Diet. Art. 79. The government consists of the head of the government and two administration councilors and an equal number of deputies for them in cases of prevention. The head of the government and his deputy shall be appointed, with the concurrence of the Diet and upon its nomination, by the Prince of the country from the voting population of the Principality. Both must be natives of Liechtenstein. Any deviation therefrom as to the head of the government is admissible only with the approval of the Diet by a three-quarters majority vote. The two administration councilors and their deputies shall be chosen by the Diet from the voting population of the Principality with equal consideration of both parts of the country, their election being subject to confirmation by the Prince of the country. The Diet shall attend to the election of the administration councilors and their deputies during the first session. The regular period of incumbency of the head of the government and of his deputy is six years; that of the administration councilors and their deputies coincides with that of the Diet. Until a new appointment or election has occurred, the former members of the government shall, respectively, continue to attend to the affairs of the government upon their own responsibility. If the Diet, upon the expiration of six years of the incumbency of the head of the government, pronounces a vote of confidence in him, this is considered to be a proposal for his re-appointment by the Prince of the country. The same applies to his deputy. Re-election of the administration councilors and their respective deputies is admissible. Art. 80. If a member of the government through his conduct of the administration loses the confidence of the population and of the Diet, the Diet, without prejudice to its right of impeachment before the High Tribunal of the State, may apply to the Prince of the country for the removal of the respective official. Art. 81. 1 With the exception of the head of the government and, as the case may be, of a permanently officiating deputy of the head of the government, the members of the government shall not receive any definite emoluments; they shall receive as compensation for their respective official functioning from the treasury of the country daily allowances and traveling expenses in the same amount as the deputies of the Diet.

Art. 82. It shall be determined by law, upon what grounds a member of the government may be prevented or excused from attending to an official act. Art. 83. For the purposes of attending to the business of the government, there shall be attached to the government as subordinate and salaried professional officials a government secretary, a treasurer, a technician for the country, and the necessary number of office clerks and employees. For the purposes of attending to certain affairs, such as the health, veterinary, and forestry services, which require particular professional capacities, there shall be appointed by the government, with the concurrence of the Diet (finance commission or commission for the country, respectively) men of such professional capacities, with a compensation to be agreed upon. Art. 84. The services of the government shall be attended to partly in council and partly through departments. Art. 85. The head of the government shall also be the head of the school council for the country. He shall preside over the government, attend to the business directly committed to him by the Prince, give the counter-signatures to the laws as well as to the decrees and ordinances issued by the Prince or a regency, if any, and he enjoys the privileges legally appertaining to the representative of the Prince of the country at public solemnities. Art. 86. The head of the government shall by personal attendance report, or send in a report respectively, to the Prince of the country concerning all matters subject to disposition by the Sovereign. The official copies of the resolutions made, upon his application, by the Sovereign shall carry the signatures of the Prince in his own handwriting and in addition the counter-signature of the head of the government. Art. 87. The official oath to be taken by the head of the government shall be administered to him by the Prince of the country or the regent respectively; the other members of the government and the State officials shall be sworn in by the head of the government. Art. 88. In case of prevention or absence of the head of the government, or where he is excluded from attending to his business upon legal grounds, his deputy shall in so far assume his functions. Where the deputy too is prevented from functioning for one of the above mentioned reasons, the senior councilor of the government shall officiate in his stead. In case of prevention of any of the councilors of the government, his respective deputy shall be called in. Art. 89. The head of the government shall sign all decrees and ordinances to be issued by the government upon deliberation in council; he shall also supervise directly the services of all business of the government. Art. 90. All matters of consequence assigned to the government for attention, particularly attention to contentious administrative matters, are subject to deliberation in council and determination by the government in a meeting attended by the head of the government as chairman, both the government councilors as co-voters, and the government-secretary for conducting the minutes thereof. These sessions, as a rule, shall occur once weekly, with additional ones whenever required. All resolutions shall be made by majority vote.

The head of the government shall see to the execution of the resolutions made. Only in a case where he considers that a resolution made contravenes existing laws or ordinances, may he postpone such execution; he must, however, without any delay, notify the authority having jurisdiction in case of an appeal or complaint, which, without prejudice to the right of a party to bring an appeal or complaint, shall render a decision in respect of the execution. Art. 91. The professional men referred to in Article 83, if required, shall attend the sessions held by the government in the capacity of reporter or of expert, with a consultative voice whenever subjects relating to their respective specialties shall be reached for deliberation. Art. 92. To the government pertains the execution of all laws and legally admissible orders given by the Prince of the country or the Diet. It shall issue the ordinances requisite for carrying out the laws, which, however, must remain within the scope of the respective laws and the legal provisions governing generally. The whole administration of the country, in any event, must be kept within the limits of the Constitution and the other laws, and even in those matters in which the law accords to the administration a free discretion, the limits thereto set up by the laws must be strictly adhered to. Art. 93. To the sphere of business assigned to the government belong in particular: (a) The control of all authorities and officials and the exercise of the power of discipline in respect of the latter; (b) The assignment of the office-staff required for the government and the other authorities; (c) The supervision of the prisons and the supreme control in respect of the treatment of persons in custody, when arrested, and of convicts; (d) The administration of provincial structures; (e) The supervision of the business of the district court, being legal and continuous, and the notification of irregularities observed to the superior court; (f) The report to be presented to the Diet annually, as to its official business activities; (g) The drafting of the bills to be submitted by the government to the Diet and the giving of opinions concerning matters submitted to it for such purpose by the Diet; (h) The disposition in respect of urgent expenses not included in the budget. Art. 94. In order that the disposal of its business matters may not be unnecessarily delayed, the disposal of current matters shall not be deferred up to the day when a session is to be held, but they shall be handled in the respective department in the regular order of business by the head of the government and/or the government councilors, respectively, upon a plan of distribution and assignment concerning all business matters to be drawn up at the start of each year by the government through deliberation in council, until such matters reach their respective final disposition by action in council where such action is required (Article 90). To current matters belong all subject matters which in themselves are of minor importance, or which concern merely preparatory dispositions, or which require reports, evidence, or decisions of commissions, or which, without prejudice to the final settlement of such matters, only establish

the condition in which the matter shall remain until its final disposition occurs. B. The School Council of the Country Art. 95. The membership and the sphere of activities of the school council of the country shall be regulated by a special law. Art. 96. As to the allowances to be paid to the members of the school council of the country, the provisions contained in Article 81 of the present Constitution shall apply. C. The Authority for Hearing Administrative Complaints and Appeals Art. 97. Except as otherwise determined by law, all decisions or decrees of the government are subject to the remedy of complaint to be had and addressed to an authority to be instituted for hearing and determining administrative complaints and appeals. The said authority shall be composed of a judge learned in the law, as chairman, to be appointed by the Prince of the country upon a nomination to be made by the Diet, and of two assistant judges chosen by the Diet from the voting population of the country, with an identical number of substitutes. Their respective incumbencies shall coincide with that of the Diet. Its decisions are final. Art. 98. The particular provisions for the purposes of securing the judicial independence of the members of this authority, as to its procedure, its jurisdiction, the periods of grace, the allowances to be paid to its members, and the fees to be paid by the parties involved, shall be made by a special law. D. The Administration of Justice Art. 99. The administration of justice shall be exercised in the name of the Prince of the country by legally admitted judges. The courts, within the legal limits of their activities and in respect of their proceedings, are independent of any interference by the government. They must incorporate in their decisions and judgments the grounds therefor. Art. 100. The fiscal authorities of the State and those of the princely house, called domanial authorities, are subject to the jurisdiction of the regular courts in respect of any kind of litigation. Art. 101. The princely district court of Vaduz is the court having jurisdiction in the first instance, the princely superior court of Vaduz is the court of appellate jurisdiction, and the princely Supreme Court is the court of last resort. The organization of the courts, their procedure and the fees to be paid in any proceedings to be had in the courts shall be determined by law. Art. 102. The procedure in cases of civil litigation is to be regulated in accordance with the principles of oral procedure, directness of procedure, and freedom to decide on the evidence. In criminal proceedings, there shall apply, in addition, the principle that all proceedings must be upon specific accusations. In matters of civil litigation, the jurisdiction of the court of first instance may be exercised by a single or by several judges, acting individually. The superior court and the Supreme Court both are collegiate courts, the members of which shall be appointed by the Prince of the country in concurrence with the Diet and upon nominations to be made by it.

The jurisdiction in criminal proceedings shall be exercised in the first instance by the district court, potentially with the concurrence of lay judges, and by the criminal court. Art. 103. The district judge presides over the district court and exercises in the first instance the power of discipline in regard to such of its officials as have no judicial functions and standing. The superior court exercises the supreme control over the administration of justice and the power of discipline regarding the judicial members of the district court; in disciplinary matters regarding the non-judicial officials of the district court, it acts as the court of appellate jurisdiction. It is also the court of first instance for cartel and trust matters. The Supreme Court exercises the disciplinary power over the members of the superior court, and it has also appellate jurisdiction in disciplinary matters relating to the judicial members of the district court. In matters concerning cartels or trusts, it acts as court of last resort. E. The High Tribunal of the State Art. 104. By special law, a High Tribunal of the State shall be instituted as a court of public law for the protection of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution, for the determination of cases involving contests of jurisdiction between the courts and the administrative authorities, and as disciplinary court for the members of the government. It has jurisdiction, furthermore, to consider whether laws are consistent with the provisions of the Constitution and whether ordinances issued by the government are legal; for these matters it is a court of cassation. Finally, it functions also as administrative tribunal and determines actions brought by the Diet for the dismissal, or the liability to damages, of the members and officials of the government, upon the grounds of violations of official duties. Art. 105. The High Tribunal of the State is composed of a president and four additional members with voting rights; its members are chosen by the Diet in such a way as to have the majority of its members consist of natives of Liechtenstein; two of its members must be learned in the law. The election of the president, who must be a native of Liechtenstein, is subject to confirmation by the Prince of the country. Art. 106. The members of the High Tribunal of the State shall enjoy the protection of judicial independence. F. General Provisions Art. 107. For any employment as an official of the State of Liechtenstein, citizenship of Liechtenstein is required, without prejudice to broader provisions of this Constitution; exceptions are admissible only with the consent of the Diet. Art. 108. The organization of the authorities of the State shall be effected by way of legislation. All authorities must be located within the territory of the country; in the case of government boards, at least the majority of their members must be natives of Liechtenstein. Art. 109. The members of the government, the employees of the State, as well as all municipal head-authorities, their respective substitute deputies, and the cashiers of the communities, upon entering their respective services, must take the following oath:

I swear allegiance to the Prince of the Country, obedience to the laws and precise observance of the Constitution, so help me God.
CHAPTER VIII

Of the Communities
Art. 110. The law shall determine the existence, organization, and tasks of the communities within their respective immediate spheres of action and those delegated to them. The following principles shall be included in the laws concerning the communities : (a) Free election of their respective heads of administration and of the other agencies of the community by the assemblies of the respective communities; (b) Independent administration of the property of the community by the community and the exercise of the local police powers under the supervision of the government of the country; (c) Provision for an orderly poor relief organization under the supervision of the government of the country; (d) The right of the communities to grant their respective citizenship and the freedom of the citizens of the country to reside in any community.
CHAPTER IX

Guarantees for the Constitution and Final Provisions
Art. 111. The present Constitution, upon its publication, shall be the generally binding and fundamental law of the country. For changes of, or amendments to, or interpretation of this fundamental law, which may be proposed either by the government or by the Diet or by the way of initiative (see Article 64), the vote of the Diet must be a unanimous one of its members present, or one by a three-quarters majority of its members present in two consecutive sessions of the Diet. Art. 112. Where doubts exist as to the construction of particular provisions of the Constitution which cannot be removed by an agreement between government and Diet, the High Tribunal of the State shall decide in respect thereof. Art. 113. All laws, ordinances, and statutory provisions which are inconsistent with an express provision contained in the present Constitution are herewith repealed and declared to be of no legal effect; those legal provisions which are contrary to the spirit of this fundamental law shall be revised in order to make them consistent with the present Constitution. Art. 114. My government is entrusted with the execution of this Constitution. The government shall make a draft as soon as possible of all the laws to be issued under the provisions of this Constitution, and shall start the steps necessary under this Constitution for their enactment as laws. The incumbency of the present Diet shall last until the end of this year. Vaal, October 5, 1921. In representation of His Eminence, the reigning Prince Johann II of and at Liechtenstein, and upon his Order given by the written Document of October 2, 1921, under his own signature: (signed) Karl (signed) Jos. Ospelt, Princely Councilor

My dear nephew Prince Karl:
In the sense of Article 13 of the Constitution of the Principality of Liechtenstein, passed by the Diet of my Principality in its session of August 24, 1921, and sanctioned by myself, I entrust Your Excellency with the signing of the new Constitutional Document as my Representative on my birthday—October 5, 1921—at Vaduz, the capital of my Principality. I remain your always well-disposed and friendly Uncle. Felsberg, October 2, 1921 (signed): Johann (signed): Jos. Ospelt, Princely Councilor Legal Gazette of the Country of Liechtenstein Year 1929. Number 5, Issued June 8, 1929

Proclamation
In agreement with the Government, the Diet in its session of May 16, 1929, conforming to Article 112 of the Constitution in regard to the removal of doubts in respect of the construction of provisions contained in the Constitution, has resolved and decided as follows:
1. Article 48, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is herewith construed as being of the meaning that in the case of a dissolution of the Diet by the Prince, a new period of four years starts as to the incumbency of the Diet resulting from the new election; 2. The provisions contained in Article 97 of the Constitution with respect to the period of incumbency of the authority instituted for determining administrative complaints are construed as being of the meaning that the period of incumbency of the said authority expires not only upon the expiration of the regular period of the incumbency of the Diet of four years, but likewise when the Diet, during the regular period of its incumbency, has been dissolved either by the Prince or by reason of a referendum. Vadilz, June 6, 1929 The Government of the Prince

(signed) Dr. Hoop

