CONSTITUTIONAL ACT of the Principality of Lichtenstein.-Eisgrub,9th November, 1818.

WE, JOHN JOSEPH, by the grace of God, Sovereign Prince and Ruler of the House of and at Lichtenstein of Nickolsburg, &c., do hereby fulfil the Stipulation contained in the XIIIth Article of the Act organizing the Germanic Confederation, ii the following manner: A RT. I. Having, since the dissolution of the Union existing under the German Empire, introduced into our Sovereign Principality of Lichtenstein the civil and penal Laws, and the judicial forms and proceedings, established in Austria, and having also subsequently adopted still more of the Austrian Legislation, by the formation of a Supreme Court of Judicature, of third instance, we do now, in like manner, adopt essentially, as a model for our said Principality, the Representative Constitution existing in the German States, belonging to Imperial Austria. 

II. The Representative Estates shall be composed: a. Of the Clergy. b. Of the Laity. 
III. Among the Clergy shall be included all the Possessors of Ecclesiastical Benefices, and all the Ecclesiastical Communities. They shall elect, by an absolute majority of voices, from among themselves, 3 Deputies for life, that is to say, 2 for the Clergy of the County of Vaduz, and 1 for the County of Schellenberg, whom they shall present, for approval and confirmation, to the Chief Authorities of our Bailiwick at Vaduz. In addition to these, every possessor of an Eccle siastical Benefice, who is in the enjoyment of a Property, either of a fixed character or that is subject to the payment of taxes, of the value of 2,500 florins, calculated according to the present scale of valuation for Taxes, or who contributes, upon a Capital of that value, to the general necessities of the Principality, shall have a right to be a Member of the Representative Assembly. IV. The Laity shall be represented by the temporal Superintendents or Judges, and by the sworn Elders or Treasurers of each Commune. All our other Subjects also who pay, according to the existing scale of taxation, a rate upon landed property vested in their own persons, and valued for such rate at 2,000 florins, who are 30 years of age, of irreproachable and independent character, and of a peaceable disposition, shall have a right to be Members of the Representative Assembly. V. A Register, containing a list of the Individuals who are entitled to belong to the Estates, shall be prepared and kept at the Chief Office of the Bailivick belonging to our Principality at Vaduz, and in such Register shall be inscribed, gratis, after establishing their respective

claims, the names of Individuals belonging to the Classes mentioned
in Articles III and IV. VI. If the Chief Authorities of the Bailiwick belonging to our Principality before-named should think proper to refuse to register, when desired, any of the Individuals above described, as Members of the Estates, who may be proposed for this purpose or may exhibit their right thereto, they shall respectfully submit to us the reasons for their refusal, and await our supreme determination thereupon. VII. In all Official Addresses, whether written or verbal, the title of Herr," (Mr.) shall be given to those Spiritual Members of the Estates who have been inserted in the Register, and in case of their personal appearance before the Authorities of the Country, they shall be entitled to the distinction of having a seat assigned to them. VII I. If those Possessors of the large Landed Estates, who are not Subjects of the Principality, or their Representatives, should, after they have been inserted in the Register, be desirous of attending the Sittings of the Representative Assembly, they shall be entitled to claim the distinction accorded to the Spiritual Members, and shall take equal rank with them. IX. For the ordinary Meetings of the Estates, we will, previously to the expiration of each year, appoint a time for commencing the Session, at which our Bailiff for the time being at Vaduz, shall, as our Sovereign Commissioner, preside, direct the order of proceedings, and open and close the Session. This Session shall be considered permanent until the issuing of the next summons, provided we do not in the meantime give directions to our said Commissioner, even in the course of the year, should it be necessary, to summon our trusty Estates to an Extraordinary Session. Each Member of the Estates shall be summoned in writing, a fortnight previously to each Session. X. Any Meeting of the Members of the Estates convened of their own arbitrary will, and without previous convocation, and also any prolongation of their Session effected also of their own accord, shall, in addition to the nullity of their Resolutions, be punished with the loss of their right as Members, and even still more severely punished, according to circumstances: disorderly and irregular conduct shall also he punished in accordance with the regulations prescribed in the Laws. XI. We will submit to every Assembly of our faithful Estates, founded upon the explanations which we may bring forward, the sums which will be required for the public exigencies; and inasmuch as no part thereof will be destined' for our own use, but only for those expenses which are necessary for the internal administration, and for external relations, our trusty Estates will have to deliberate only upon the propriety of raising the sums required, and the means of providing them. 
1194
XII. It being our decided determination that all fixed and immoveable Property of every description, without distinction as to the Owners of the same, shall be taxed in an equal proportion, and that a perfect equality also in supporting the public burthens shall secure each individual Subject against over-assessment, the maintenance of this equality shall be the special care of the Assembly of the Estates. XIII. The general advantage of the whole Country shall be the sole object of the Estates; and all partiality or favouritism towards Individuals or Classes shall be avoided. We, therefore, concede to every Member of the Estates the privilege of making those Propositions in the Diet which tend to the public good, but we reserve to Ourselves the right to approve or to reject the resolutions of the Assembly, respecting those Propositions. XIV. Those Propositions shall not, however, have reference to matters which affect our own peculiar Domanial, or Personal, Revenues, either according to local Regulations, or long established usage, because, although they may be included under the name of Regalia of the Country, they are, notwithstanding, our own private Property, and do not come within the cognizance of the Assembly of the Estates. XV. On the other hand, we give our most gracious assurance to our faithful Subjects, that we will, upon the introduction of new general Taxes affecting property, unless an objection thereto can be justified by right of Sovereignty, or be founded upon a Domanial Title, consent that they be submitted for the deliberation of the Estates, and that we will not refuse our supreme approval of them in all proper and equitable cases, in which we are concerned. XVI. We cannot concede to Members of our faithful Estates the right of submitting Propositions, which have reference to the civil, political, and penal Departments of the Administration, in consequence of the circumstances already mentioned in Article I ; nor the right of submitting Propositions which have reference to the external relations of the State, on account of the necessary concert and agreement which it is necessary to maintain with other and powerful States of Germany. XVII. The absolute majority of voices of the Members of the Estates present in the Assembly, shall form a Resolution, which shall have the force of Law, so soon as we shall have given our supreme sanction to the same. Previously thereto, the Commissioner of our Sovereign Principality shall, after having clearly ascertained the object of the Resolution, enquire, alternately, the opinion of the ecclesiastical and lay Members of the Estates, one by one, beginning with the former: he shall then insert in the Protocol, by means of his Official Secretary, each individual vote, and the reasons upon which it was founded, and shall cause the result thereof to be annexed thereto, and shall thus submit to us the Resolution of the Assembly.

