CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

LITHUANIA
by GISBERT H. FLANZ

RELEASE 92-1 Issued January 1992

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

This work contains British Crown Copyright Material which is reproduced by permission of the Controller of Her Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office. This work contains material © Copyright by the Government Printer, Australian Government Publishing Service, and is reproduced with permission.

Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 ISBN 0-379-00467-4 © Copyright 1992 by Oceana Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, xerography, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Manufactured in the United States of America

CONSTITUTION OF LITHUANIA (Vyriausybes Zinios/Official Gazette/ No. 608, Serial No. 4271, May 12, 1938, Kaunas) The President of the Republic hereby proclaims the following Constitution of Lithuania which was adopted by the Seimas (Parliament) on February 11 in the year 1938: CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA The Lithuanian Nation, mindful of its illustrious past, has restored the independent sovereign State of Lithuania, and has defended it by arms, so that, realizing its eternal right to be free and independent in the lands of its fathers, it may guard by the united will of the Nation everything that has belonged to it through the ages, that it may continue its noble deeds, and that by the efforts of the present and future generations it may augment the power of Lithuania. In the light of the experience of the Lithuanian nation, gained from its antiguity and the tradition of its statehood, from its rebirth and its struggles for independence, from the efforts of resurrected Lithuania, and from its creation as a National State, this Constitution is determined for Lithuania: DIVISION I General Provisions Article 1 The State of Lithuania is independent and sovereign. Its sovereignty is inherent in the Nation. Article 2

The territory of the State of Lithuania shall consist of such areas as are within the borders determined by international agreements entered into up to the present time by the State of Lithuania. These integral parts cannot be separated. Article 3 The State of Lithuania is a republic. The President of the Republic is its head. Article 4 The power of the State is one and indivisible. It is enforced by the President of the Republic, the Seimas, the Council of Ministers, and the Judiciary. Article 5 The governing organs shall base all their actions on justice. Article 6 The Capital of Lithuania is Vilnius. The seat of government of the State may provisionally be transferred elsewhere by law. Article 7 The State language is the Lithuanian language. It shall be determined by law in which districts and in which public offices other languages besides Lithuanian may be used. Article 8 The State emblem shall be a white knight on, a red backgorund. The national colors shall be yellow, green, and red.

The State emblem, the national flag, and the use thereof shall be determined by law. Districts and towns of Lithuania may have their own emblems determined by law. Article 9 The national holidays shall be (1) February 16, in commemoration of the restoration of the Independence of Lithuania; and, (2) September 8, in commemoration of the Great Past of Lithuania. Article 10 National holidays, Sundays and other holidays recognized by the State shall be days of rest and spiritual elevation. Work shall be allowed on holidays in instances determined by law. DIVISION II Citizenship Article 11 Citizenship shall be acquired by birth, marriage, and other family ties, also by options, reinstatement, and repatriation. Article 12 Citizenship may be granted to: (1) a Lithuanian who has established residence in the State of Lithuania; (2) a non-Lithuanian who has resided in the State of Lithuania for at least ten years; and (3) a person who has rendered meritorious service to the State of Lithuania. Article 13 A citizen who has acquired foreign citizenship shall lose his Lithuanian citizenship.

The territory of the State of Lithuania shall consist of such areas as are within the borders determined by international agreements entered into up to the present time by the State of Lithuania. These integral parts cannot be separated. Article 3 The State of Lithuania is a republic. The President of the Republic is its head. Article 4 The power of the State is one and indivisible. It is enforced by the President of the Republic, the Seimas, the Council of Ministers, and the Judiciary. Article 5 The governing organs shall base all their actions on justice. Article 6 The Capital of Lithuania is Vilnius. The seat of government of the State may provisionally be transferred elsewhere by law. Article 7 The State language is the Lithuanian language. It shall be determined by law in which districts and in which public offices other languages besides Lithuanian may be used. Article 8 The State emblem shall be a white knight on, a red backgorund. The national colors shall be yellow, green, and red.

on account of his religion, race, or national origin. Article 19 Taxes shall be imposed by-law.. Article 20 It shall be the duty of the State to safeguard the freedom of conscience of the citizen. A citizen shall be free to belong or not to belong to any of the churches recognized by the State or to other equivalent religious organizations. Religious persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of any person shall be given time to fulfill their religious duties. The belief of a citizen cannot be the basis for the justification of a crime or abstention from fulfillment of obligations imposed by the State. Article 21 The person of a citizen shall be inviolable. No citizen shall be summoned before the court or put under arrest except in the cases and in accordance with the procedure determined by law. The warrant for the arrest of a citizen shall be delivered to him within forty-eight hours, and the grounds for the arrest shall be indicated. An arrested person who has not received that warrant shall be released. Article 22 The State shall protect the inviolability of the home of the citizen. The State may restrict by law the inviolability of the house of the citizen, in so far as it is necessary in order that the State may

combat crime. Article 23 The State shall protect the secrecy of the contents of citizens' correspondence. The State may ascertain the content of communications of citizens by law, in so far as is necessary for the State to combat crime. Article 24 A citizen may move freely within the whole territory of the State and may reside in any part thereof. The State may restrict this right by law in the interests of the security of the State. Article The State shall safeguard the freedom of the public activity of citizens, especially in the press, societies, and meetings, mindful that such activities shall not be detrimental to the State. Article 26 A citizen shall have the right of petition. This right shall be exercised by citizens in accordance with the procedure determined by law. DIVISION IV Religion Article 27 Cognizant of the value of religion in the life of a person, the State recognizes the existing churches in Lithuania and equivalent religious organizations. Other churches and equivalent religious

organizations may be recognized by the State if their doctrines and rituals are not contrary to morals and public order. Article 28 The churches and equivalent religious organizations recognized by the State may freely teach their doctrines, perform their services, maintain houses of prayer, and operate religious schools for the preparation of their clergy. Article 29 Religious orders, congregations, and brotherhoods of churches and equivalent religious organizations recognized by the State shall have freedom of action, in so far as their activity is restricted to the teaching of religious doctrines and religious services and prayer. Article 30 Churches and equivalent religious organizations recognized by the State shall have the rights of a juridical person. The limits of these rights shall be determined by law. Article 31 The clergy of religions recognized by the State. may be released from military service by law. Article 32 The teaching of doctrines, performance of religious services and prayers, and other religious activity of churches recognized by the State and equivalent religious organizations, and also houses of prayer, shall not be used for purposes that are contrary to the Constitution and the laws. Article 33

The status of churches and equivalent religious organizations in the State shall be determined by agreement or by law. DIVISION V Family and Motherhood Article 34 A sound family is the foundation of the strength of the State. The State shall respect, guard and protect the family. Large families shall be especially protected. Article 35 Motherhood shall be respected, guarded, and protected. In protecting motherhood, children, and youth, the State shall seek a sound body and strong spirit in the growing generation. DIVISION VI Nurture and Education Article 36 The basic centers of nurture and education are the family and the school. The State also recognizes the value in nurture of the Church and of equivalent religious organizations. Article 37 The duty of parents shall be to bring up their children, imbue them with love for their Fatherland and the determination to sacrifice themselves for the Fatherland. The duty of children shall be to honor their parents, care for them in their old age, and protect their inheritance.

Article 38 For the nurture, instruction, and education of youth, the State shall. 	 training institutions, schools, And youth organizations. The State shall endeavor that the the spiritual and physical powers of youth be so developed that they may be usefully applied to the spiritual and economic life of Lithuania. Article 39 Individual citizens and organizations as well as churches and equivalent religious organizations shall be permitted, according to the provisions and procedure determined by law, to maintain training institutions and schools. Article 40 Elementary education shall be compulsory. Education in the primary schools of municipalities and of the State shall be free. Article 41 In primary and secondary schools, religion shall be taught to pupils belonging to the churches or to equivalent religious organizations recognized by the State. It shall be determined by law in which other schools religion shall be taught. When few pupils belong to any church or equivalent religious organizations in a school, religion shall not be taught to those pupils according to the cases provided for by law. Religion shall not be taught to pupils belonging to a church or equivalent religious organization when it is impossible to provide a teacher. Article 42 The State shall supervise the work of nurture and education and shall also supervise
65

Article 43 training institutions and schools. Article 43 The primary purpose of Lithuanian science and the arts shall be to serve the progress of Lithuania. The State shall be the guardian of science and the arts and shall protect the monuments of Lithuania's past and her other cultural wealth. DIVISION VII Labor Article 44 All labor is a part of universal production and is equally honorable. The State is maintained by unending labor. The working power of a citizen is also the wealth of the nation. The citizen shall be imbued withe the love of work and the spirit of constructive work. Article 45 It shall be the concern of the State that the worker and his family share in the advantages of the cultural life of Lithuania. It shall be the duty of the State to see that the worker shall have rest and proper conditions for rest. Article 46 The State shall aspire that all those who are capable of work be provided with work. Those who avoid work may be compelled by the State to work.
66

Article 47 Provision shall be made for the rational and regular use of the working powers of citizens. The State, acting as guardian, may regulate the performance of labor tasks. DIVISION VIII The Economy of the Nation Article 48 The purpose of the economy of the Nation shall be to provide the material conditions necessary for the welfare of the State and the citizen. Article 49 The successful economic activity of the nation is based on the conscientious determination of the citizen to strive and to produce for his own welfare and that of the State with activity between labor and capital. Article 50 The welfare of the State and the citizen is attained when the citizen works rationally in an orderly manner and avoids waste. Article 51 The State shall protect the right of ownership. Property imposes the obligation upon its administrator to adjust the use of that property in conformity with the interests of the State. The State may by law expropriate property in the public interest with equitable compensation. Article 52

A citizen shall have the right to undertake work of his choice within the area of the State, and to choose the form and place of his economic activity. The State may restrict this right by law in the interests of the security of the State. Article 53 The State shall take care that agriculture be based on sound economic units and that farmers take active part in the rational agricultural production and have the necessary conditions for that purpose. The State shall endeavor to see that industry, commerce, and trade make rational use of economic possibilities. Article 54 The State shall supp ort the sound economic efforts of citizens and, when it appears necessary, may itself engage in economic activity. Article 55 The State may establish labor, service in the public interest. Article 56 Concerned with the establishment of a sound and rational form of national economy and activity, the State shall supervise and may regulate economic, activity in general and individual enterprises in particular. DIVISION IX Health and Social Security Article 57 The State shall take an interest in the health of its citizens.

Article 58 The State shall take care of workers and their families in sickness, old age and in case of accidents. Article 59 The State shall support and strengthen the will and the capability of citizens to provide for themselves and for their families. The State shall aspire to provide for citizens who are unable to provide for themselves and for their families". Article 60 Individual citizens and organizations as well as churches and equivalent religious organizations shall be permitted to maintain charity institutions according to the conditions and procedure determined by law. DIVISION X President of the Republic Article 61 The President of the Republic shall represent the State of Lithuania, receive the representatives of foreign states, appoint the representatives of the State of Lithuania, and fulfill other functions assigned to him by the Constitution and the laws. Article 62 The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term of seven years. He may be re-elected. Article 63 be	 A citizen who on the day of election shall least forty years of age, and who` shall be

eligible for election as a Member of Seimas, may be elected President of the Republic. Article 64 The President of the Republic shall be elected by the Representatives of the Nation. It shall be determined by law who may be elected a Representative of the Nation, how the Representatives of the Nation shall be elected, and how the Representatives shall elect the President of the Republic. Article 65 The President-elect of the Republic shall assume the leadership of the State by taking the oath in the presence of the Representatives of the Nation. The words of the oath are as follows: "I swear before Almighty God that in leading the State I shall concern myself with the unity of the Nation, protect its honor, develop the power and welfare of Lithuania and rightfully use the power vested in me by the Constitution,always mindful of my responsibility for the present and future of Lithuania. May the Great Past of Lithuania and the heroic struggle for the restoration of Independence inspire me to that end, so help me God." The deed of the oath shall be signed by the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister. The oath shall be taken also by the reelected President of the Republic. Article 66 The period of the leadership of the State by the President of the Republic shall commence on the day on which he assumes such leadership.

Article 67 The Presidential elections shall take place in the last half year of the term of office of the incumbent President of the Republic. The elected President of the Republic shall assume the leadership of the State on the day following the expiration of the seven-year leadership of the State by the incumbent President of the Republic, or, if on that day the results of the elections have not yet come into force, the next day after they have come into force. Article 68 In the event that the President of the Republic should die or resign, the Presidential elections shall take place soon after his death or resignation. The elected President of the Republic shall assume the leadership of the State the next day after the results of the elections come into force. Article 69 If the President of the Republic cannot be elected or the elections are postponed on account of war or other insurmountable difficulties, the elections shall take place immediately after such difficulties disappear. The elected President of the Republic shall assume the leadership of the State on the next day after the results of the elections come into force. Article 70 Until the elected President of the Republic assumes the leadership of the State, it shall be under the leadership of the incumbent President of the Republic.

Article 71 In the event that the President of the Republic is ill or away from the country, the Prime Minister shall act in his stead. The Prime Minister in charge shall execute for the President acts that are inherent in his powers. Article 72 In the event of the death or resignation of the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister shall assume the leadership of the State until a President of the Republic shall be elected and until he assumes the leadership of the State. While heading the State, the Prime Minister shall have all the powers of the President of the Republic. Article 73 The President of the Republic shall not be responsible for actions taken within his powers. For other actions, the President of the Republic shall not be called to account while he is leading the State. Article 74 A decree of the. President. 	 the Republic shall require the signature of the Prime Minister or of the appropriate Minister. A decree of the President of the Republic by which the Prime Minister or State Comptroller is appointed or dismissed or which grants permission to prosecute the Prime Minister or State Comptroller for a service crime shall require neither the signature of the Prime Minister nor that of any other Minister. DIVISION XI

Article 75 The Seimas shall be elected for a term of five years. The number of Members of the Seimas and the method of their election shall be determined by the Seimas Election Law. Article 76 Citizens who are not less than thirty years of age may be nominated as candidates to be Members of the Seimas. The Seimas Election Law shall determine who may nominate candidates to be Members of the Seimas, who may be nominated, and how they shall be nominated. Article 77 Candidates to be Members of the Seimas shall be voted for by general, direct, equal, and secret ballot. The system of election shall be that of proportional representation. Article 78 Citizens who are not less than twenty-four years of age shall have the right to vote for candidates to be Members of the Seimas. The Seimas Election Law shall determine who does not have the right to vote. It shall be the duty of every citizen to vote provided that he possesses the right to vote. The voting days shall be determined by the President of the Republic. Article 79 An elected Member of the Seimas shall take the oath or solemn promise.

The oath or solemn promise shall be taken by the President of the Republic and by the Prime Minister upon his authorization. The words of the oath or solemn promise shall be determined by the Seimas Election Law. Article 80 An elected Member of the Seimas may not enter upon the duties of a Member of the Seimas and shall not enjoy the rights of a Member of the Seimas prior to his taking the oath or giving his solemn promise. An elected Member of the Seimas who within the time limit determined by law shall not have taken the oath or given the solemn promise, or who shall have given it conditionally or who shall have refused to give it, shall lose his right to be a Member of the elected Seimas. Article 81 The President of the Republic shall dismiss the Seimas after a term of five years. The President of the Republic may dismiss the Seimas before the expiration of the term of five years. Article 82 The term of office of the Seimas shall begin on the day that is appointed by the President of the Republic for the first session of the Seimas. The term of office of the Seimas shall expire five years after the first session of the Seimas, or on the day of dissolution of the Seimas if it shall be dissolved prior to the expiration of the five year term. Article 83 If Members of the Seimas cannot be elected on account of war or other insurmountable

difficulties, the President of the Republic may extend the term of office of the Seimas. The term of office of the Seimas, in the event that it is extended, shall end upon the expiration of the period for which it was extended, and on the day of dissolution if the Seimas shall be dissolved prior to the expiration of the period of extention. Article 84 Upon the expiration of the term of office of the Seimas, the voting days for the election of the Members of the Seimas shall be determined not later than within six months. In the event that the Members of the Seimas cannot be elected or the elections are postponed owing to war or other insurmountable difficulty, the elections shall take place as soon as the difficulties have disappeared. Article 85 The Seimas shall elect the Speaker of the Seimas and the other Presiding Officers of the Seimas. Until the new Seimas shall have elected the presiding officers of the Seimas, provisional Presiding Officers from among the Members of the Seimas shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, or by the Prime Minister upon the President's authorization. Article 86 The Seimas shall adopt its working statute. It shall be determined by law. Article 87 The Seimas shall have two ordinary sessions annually. The spring session shall open on February 15 and close on April 15; the autumn session shall open on September 15 and ends on December 31.

Ordinary sessions shall be convened by the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic may close an ordinary session prior to the expiration of the time period of the session. Article 88 Extraordinary sessions of the Seimas shall be called by the President of the Republic either upon his own initiative, when he draws up the agenda of the session, or upon the demand of three fifths of the Members of the Seimas. The demand shall set forth the matters to be considered by the session. The agenda of the extraordinary sessions may be supplemented by the President of the Republic in the course of the session. An extraordinary session may be closed by the President of the Republic even before the agenda has been exhausted. Article 89 The sessions of the Seimas shall be opened by the President of the Republic or by the Prime Minister upon the President's authorization. Article 90 The Seimas may consider and make decisions when not less than one half of the Members of the Seimas are present at the meeting. The Seimas shall make its decisions by ballot. The Seimas shall reach a decision by a vote of the majority of the Members of the Seimas present. at the meeting, whenever the Constitution does not provide for a larger majority. By the provisions of the Constitution, matters that require a larger majority shall

be considered by the Seimas when the number of Members of the Seimas participating constitutes such a majority. Article 91 A Member of the Seimas, during his work in the Seimas, shall seek the general welfare of Lithuania and shall not abnegate it because of personal business or that pertaining to some Lithuanian district or for any other partial interest. Article 92 A Member of the Seimas who shall participate in work that is inconsistent by law with his duties, or who shall lose the qualifications determined by law for a Member of the Seimas, shall cease to be a Member of the Seimas. Article 93 A Member of the Seimas shall not be held responsible for his speeches made in the Seimas, but, in the event that his speeches are detrimental to the security of the State, he may be called upon to answer for them according to the usual procedure. A Member of the Seimas shall be held responsible according to the same procedure for insulting statements made in his speeches during a meeting of the Seimas. Article 94 A Member of the Seimas may be arrested during the session of the Seimas only when caught in the deed (IN FLAGRANTI), or when he has committed a crime for which he may be sentenced to hard labor; the warrant to arrest a Member of the Seimas shall be reported to the Speaker of the Seimas not later than twenty-four hours after the Member of the Seimas has been arrested. In all other cases a Member of the Seimas may be arrested during the session of the Seimas only with the approval of the Seimas. DIVISION XII

The. Government Article 95 The Prime Minister and other Ministers shall constitute the Government. One of the Ministers •shall be the Deputy Prime Minister. Article 96 The Prime Minister shall lead the Government and represent it. A Minister shall administer within the jurisdiction assigned to him by the State. The Ministers shall act uniformly. Article 97 The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss the. Prime Minister and, upon his recommendation, he shall appoint and dismiss the Deputy Prime Minister and other Ministers. Upon the dismissal of the Prime Minister, the other Ministers shall also be dismissed. Article 98 Prior to taking over the office assigned to them by the President of the Republic, the Ministers shall take an oath or give a solemn promise. The President of the Republic shall administer the oath or solemn promise. The text of the oath or the solemn promise shall be determined by the statute of the Council of Ministers. Article 99 The Prime Minister and the other Ministers shall constitute the Cabinet of Ministers.

The Cabinet of Ministers shall discuss and reach decisions concerning State affairs. The State Comptroller shall participate in an advisory capacity at the meetings of the Cabinet of Ministers. Article 100 The President of the Republic shall preside over the meeting of the Cabinet of Ministers when he is present at the meeting. The President of the Republic may call meetings of the Cabinet of Ministers. Article 101 The Deputy Prime Minister shall act for the Prime Minister when the latter cannot perform his duties, or when the Prime Minister shall entrust his duties to be performed for a certain time or for a certain reason. Article 102 When the Prime Minister acts for the President of the Republic or when, upon the death or resignation of the President of the Republic, he leads the State, he shall not act as Prime Minister. The duties of the Prime Minister during such time shall be performed by the Deputy Prime Minister. Article 103 A court case may be instituted against the Prime Minister or against any Minister for service offenses only with the consent of the President of the Republic. Such cases shall be decided at a meeting of the Supreme Tribunal, which shall consist of not less than five judges. The procedure shall be determined by law. Article 104 The State Council shall consider the

preparation and discussion of laws and regulations, express its views thereupon, and discuss the codification of laws and other pertinent questions. The composition and competence of the State Council shall be determined by law. Article 105 The Statute of the Council of Ministers shall be determined by law. DIVISION XIII Laws Article 106 Laws that are contrary to the Constitution shall be null and void. Article 107 The Seimas shall discuss and pass laws. Laws shall be proposed by the Council of Ministers or by at least one fourth of the members of the Seimas. Article 108 A law passed by the Seimas shall be presented to the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic, not later than within thirty days, shall either approve the law passed by the Seimas and promulgate it, or shall return it to the Seimas for reconsideration, indicating the reasons for which it is not approved. Article 109 If the Seimas approving a law for the second time, shall pass the unchanged law by a majority of at least three fifth of the Members of the Seimas, the President of the Republic

shill either approve such a law and promulgate it, or shall dismiss the Seimas. If the newly elected Seimas in its first session, upon a proposal agreed upon by at least one fourth of the Members of the Seimas, shall discuss the same unchanged law, and if the Seimas shall pass it unchanged, by a majority of the Members of the Seimas, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it as a law. Article 110 The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws when there is no Seimas, or when the Seimas is not in session. Article 111 The order of promulgating laws and their coming into effect shall be determined by law. Article 112 The President of the Republic shall authorize the concluding of international agreements and shall ratify them. When the Seimas is in session, the Council of Ministers shall recommend to the Seimas for its consent to ratification of such agreements which amend the laws or require the passing of a new law. DIVISION XIV Budget of the State Article 113 The fiscal year shall begin on. January 1 and shall end on December 31. The budget shall be estimated for every fiscal year. The Council of Ministers shall prepare the

budget. Article 114 Prior to November 1 the Council of Ministers shall submit to the Seimas the budget for consideration. When considering the budget, the Seimas may increase the expenditures, determining by law the new revenues required to defray such expenditures, but it cannot decrease expenditures that have been determined by law or agreements. If by decision of the Council of Ministers a plan for several years has been determined for administration of some economic undertaking and if funds have been assigned by the budget for the beginning of the enforcement of this plan, the Seimas cannot decrease the amount of funds set forth by the Council of Ministers in the budget for the enforcement of this plan. Article 115 The budget adopted by the Seimas shall be submitted to the President of the Republic before the end of the autumn session of the Seimas. The President of the Republic shall approve the budget passed by the Seimas. Article 116 Should the Seimas not pass the budget before the ending of the autumn session of the Seimas, and if the President of the Republic does not call an extraordinary session for the consideration of the budget, the Council of Ministers shall submit the budget to the President of the Republic for approval. Article 117 In the event that there is no Seimas, the Council of Ministers shall submit the budget to

the President of the Republic for approval. Article 118 The approved budget shall be proclaimed by the President of the Republic. If the budget is, not proclaimed before the beginning of the fiscal year, expenditures may be made in the manner stipulated by the Budget Law. Article 119 The budget may be changed. The manner applied for the changing of the budget is the manner set forth for the preparing, passing and approving the budget. Nevertheless, in the absence of the Seimas, or when the Seimas is not in session, the Council of Ministers may present to the President of the Republic an amendment of the budget for approval. DIVISION XV Inquiries and Interpolations Article 120 A Member of the Seimas may put a question to the Prime Minister or to a Minister. Article 121 Upon a proposal recommended by not less than one fourth of the Members of the Seimas, the Seimas may submit an interpelation to the Prime Minister or Minister. Article 122 After hearing the reply of the Prime Minister or the Minister to an interpelation and upon a proposal agreed upon by at least one fourth of the Members of the Seimas, a

majority of at least three fifths of the Members of the Seimas may decide that they consider the reply unsatisfactory. If the Seimas shall so decide regarding a reply of the Prime Minister, the Prime Minister will be dismissed or the Seimas be disolved. If the Seimas shall so decide regarding a reply of a Minister, the Minister will be dismissed. If, however, the Prime Minister shall state, before the Seimas reaches a decision regarding the reply of the interpelated Minister, then the interpretation made to the Minister shall be considered as made to the Prime Minister. If the newly elected Seimas, at its first session, upon proposal sponsored by at least one fourth of the Members of the Seimas, shall decide to discuss the same interpelation for which the Seimas was dismissed, and which was addressed to the same Prime Minister to whom the dismissed Seimas had presented the interpelation, and if by a majority of Members of the Seimas, the Seimas decides that the reply to the interpelation unsatisfactory, the President of the Republic shall dismiss the Prime Minister.
DIVISION XVI Administrative System of the State Article 123

For the administration of Government branches there shall be Ministries. The territory of the State shall be divided into administrative territorial divisions for the work of the Ministries. The organization of the Ministries shall

be determined by law. Article 124 The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss officials and other employees whose appointment and dismissal are designated to him by law. The organization of the service system of officials and other employees shall be determined by law. Article 125 Birth, marriage, and death records shall be kept by institutions of the State under conditions and in the manner stipulated by law. The faithful may keep these records under the auspices of the clergy of their faith in accordance with the requirements and in the manner determined by law, and they are not obliged to repeat them elsewhere. Article 126 For the care of local affairs, there shall be regional self-governing councils and municipalities. The right of autonomous activity may be granted to economic and crafts' branches. The administration, jurisdiction, and conditions governing local affairs and autonomous municipalities shall be determined by law. Article 127 Certain regions of Lithuania may be granted the right to manage autonomously certain local affairs. The right of autonomy shall be granted, and the limits and the conditions of the autonomous management of local affairs shall be determined

by the autonomous statute of the region which is determined by law. Article 128 The accuracy and legality of actions of administrative institutions shall be supervised by superior institutions in the manner stipulated by law. The manner in which the legality of actions of administrative institutions shall be protected, and the court procedure shall be stipulated by law. DIVISION XVII The Court Article 129 The court shall enact justice. In performing its duties the Court shall be independent. The Court shall hand down decisions in the name of the Republic of Lithuania. Court decisions may be altered or annulled only in the manner stipulated by law. Article 130 The President of the Republic may grant total pardon of a sentence imposed by court decision, or any part thereof, or may commute it by a lighter penalty. In cases determined by law the President or the Republic shall have the right to restore rights that have been withdrawn, or restricted. Article 131 There shall be one supreme court for the whole territory of the State. This court shall be the Supreme Tribunal.

Article 132 Courts shall be instituted by law. The organization of courts and procedure shall be determined by law. DIVISION XVIII Defense of the State Article 133 All citizens shall defend the State. The Army shall compose the nucleus of defense. Article 134 Citizens shall be appropriately prepared for the defense of the State. The national economy shall be coordinated with the requirements for the defense of the State. Article 135 The President of the Republic shall be Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. The composition of the Armed Forces and the organization and competence of the command shall be determined by law. Article 136 The President of the Republic may appoint and dismiss the Chief of the Army. A court case against the Chief of the Army for service offenses may be instituted only upon the consent of the President of the Republic. Article 137

There shall be a State Defense Council headed by the President of the Republic which shall decide upon affairs of State defense. The composition and competence of the State Defense Council shall be determined by law. Article 138 When the State is being defended, matters pertaining to State defense shall be governed by decrees of the President of the Republic which have the power of law. During this period, laws governing the defense of the State shall remain in force until they are changed by decree of the President of the Republic. A decree of the President of the Republic shall require the signature of the Prime Minister. Article 139 When public order or the security of the State is in danger, an extraordinary period the intensified State protection period or the State defense period - may be proclaimed in the State or its part. The extraordinary period shall be proclaimed and revoked by the President of the Republic upon the recommendation of the Council of Ministers. Article 140 The law proclaiming an extraordinary period shall give the right to restrict or suspend the rights of citizens, stipulated in the division regarding duties and rights of citizens, with the exception of the provisions of Article 20, to adopt specific measures for the defense of the State, and to impose particular duties upon the citizens. During the extraordinary period, special courts may be instituted by law.

Article 141 The President of the Republic shall decide questions pertaining to mobilization, war, and peace upon recommendation of the Council of Ministers. When there is a Seimas, the consent of the Seimas shall be necessary for deciding upon questions pertaining to peace. Article 142 Military courts shall have jurisdiction over soldiers on active service and over all civilian aides. Article 143 The State shall protect and provide for soldiers who lose their health in the performance of military service, and also for the families of soldiers who lose their health or life in the performance of military service. In cases foreseen bylaw, the State shall make provision for citizens who lose their health while participating in the defense of the State, and for families of citizens who lose their lives while participating in the defense of the State. DIVISION XIX Office of the State Comptroller Article 144 The State Comptroller shall be in charge of the State Comptroller's Office. The President of the Republic shall appoint and dismiss the State Comptroller. Article 145 The State Comptroller shall take an oath

or give a solemn promise before entering upon his duties. The President of the Republic shall administer the oath or the solemn promise. The text of the oath or solemn promise shall be determined by the law of the State Comptroller's Office. Article 146 The State Comptroller shall supervise the just administration of the property of the State. In cases foreseen by law, the State Comptroller shall express his opinion regarding the expediency of agreements. Conflicts of opinion between the State Comptroller and a Minister as to expediency of agreements shall be decided by the Council of Ministers. Article 147 The State Comptroller shall supervise the correct enactment of the State budget. Complaints regarding deductions shall be decided in the manner stipulated by law. Article 148 The State Comptroller shall prepare annually, the account of the enforcement of the budget and shall submit it to the Seimas for approval. In the event that there is no Seimas, the account shall be submitted to the President of the Republic. Article 149 The State Comptroller may be appointed by law to supervise in determining the just administration of property and use of funds by local or autonomous municipalities and such private institutions and enterprises in which the State Treasury participate or which receive

subsidies from the State Treasury. Article 150 Court cases may be instituted and decided against the State Comptroller for service offenses according to the procedure stipulated for the institution of court cases for service offenses against a Minister. Article 151 The organization of the State Comptroller's Office shall be determined by law. DIVISION XX Amendment of the Constitution Article 152 The Council of Ministers, or at least one half of the Members of the Seimas, may propose an amendment to the Constitution. The Seimas shall decide upon a proposed amendment to the Constitution. ,Article 153 The Seimas shall adopt the amendment to the Constitution by a majority of at least three fifths of the Members of the Seimas. An amendment to the Constitution that has been passed by the Seimas shall be submitted to the President of the Republic. Article 154 The President of the Republic shall either approve and promulgate an amendment to the Constitution that has been passed by the Seimas, or he shall dissolve the Seimas. If the newly elected Seimas, at its first session, upon proposal of at least one half

of the Members of the Seimas, shall decide to discuss the same unchanged amendment to the Constitution and if the Seimas shall pass it unchanged by a majority of at least three fifths of the Members of the Seimas, the President of the Republic shall proclaim it an amendment to the Constitution. DIVISION XXI Concluding Provisions Article 155 Upon the coming into force of this Constitution, the Lithuanian. State Constitution ("Official Gazette" No. 275, Serial No. 1778) becomes null and void. Article 156 Laws in force, until this Constitution comes into force, which are not contradictory to this Constitution and will not be amended or abrogated in the manner stipulated by this Constitution, shall remain in force. A. Smetona PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

V. Mironas PRIME MINISTER

