CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

MALI
by HANNAH- JEAN BRAFMAN

Issued July 1977

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

THE TEXT OF THE CONSTITUTION WAS TRANSLATED BY ALFONSO L. GEORENO

© Copyright 1977 by Oceana Publications, Inc.
Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

REPUBLIC

OF

MALI

CONSTITUTION One People - One Goal - One Faith Adopted by the constitutional referendum of June 2, 1974 and promulgated by Decree No. 03/PG.RM of July 1, 1974 PREAMBLE The People of Mali solemnly proclaim the Republic of Mali, founded on the ideal of liberty and justice, The Republic of Mali shall organize the conditions necessary for the harmonious development of the individual and the family within a modern society and with respect for the African personality. The Republic of Mali solemnly reaffirms the Rights of Man and Citizen as sanctioned by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of December 10, 1948. It recognizes for all men the right to work and to rest, the right to strike, the freedom to organize in cooperative organizations or tradeunion organizations of their choice for the defense of their professional interests. Work shall be the duty of every citizen, but no one may be compelled to do specific work, except in the performance of an exceptional service for the common good, being the same for everyone and under conditions determined by law. The Malian People, aware of the historical, moral and material obligations which unite the

1

States of Africa, and anxious to achieve the liberation and the political, economic and social unity indispensable to the assertion of the African personality, affirm their determination to continue working for the total realization of this liberation and this unity. TITLE I -- THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Article 1. The Republic of Mali shall be indivisible, democratic, secular and social. Its principle shall be government of the people, by the people and for the people. The institutions of the Republic shall be: the Party, the President of the Republic, the Government, the National Assembly, the Supreme Court, and the High Court of Justice. The seat of power shall be Bamako. It may be transferred by law to any other location. The Republic shall assure to all equality before the law, without regard to origin, race, language, sex, religion or belief. The national emblem shall be made up of three vertical and equal stripes of green, gold and red. The motto shall be "One People, One Goal, One Faith." The seal and arms of the Republic shall be determined by law. The official language shall be French. Article 2. Sovereignty shall be vested in the people in their entirety. No faction or individual may assume the exercise thereof. Article 3. The people shall exercise their sovereignty through their elected representatives or by referendum. Article 4. Suffrage shall be universal, 2

equal and secret. Article 5. The Party shall be unitary. It is the expression of national unity and the supreme political authority of the nation. It shall define the political orientation of the State and conform to the expression of universal suffage, according to the legal arrangements which are in force. Article 6. Every act of ethnic, racial or religious discrimination, as well as all regionalist propaganda tending to threaten the security of the State or the territorial integrity of the Republic, shall be punishable by law. TITLE II -- FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF MAN AND CITIZEN Article 7. No one may be arrested or detained except in conformity with the provisions of the law then in force, and only upon the order of a legally competent authority. Article 8. No penalty or punishment may be imposed except by virtue of the law. Punishments may be imposed only for acts committed subsequent to the law which criminalizes them. Article 9. Punishment shall be personal. Article 10. The home shall be inviolable. This provision may be violated only in cases provided for by the law and in accordance with the procedures therein prescribed. Article 11. The State shall undertake to guarantee the exercise of all religions and beliefs, in accordance with custom and with respect for public order. Article 12. Education shall be the right of all Malians. It shall be public and secular. Article 13. The Republic of Mali guarantees to its citizens, within the framework of the law: 3

the right to work; equality in employment; the right to rest; the right to social assistance and to education; the freedom to form organizations of their choice for the defense of professional interests. Article 14. The right to hold property shall be guaranteed by the Constitution. It may not be taken away except in cases of public necessity as stated in the law. Article 15. Freedom of enterprise shall be guaranteed by the Constitution and shall be exercised within the framework of the laws regulating it. Article 16. All citizens, regardless of race, ethnic origin, religion, sex, or opinion, are electors and shall be eligible to vote in accordance with the conditions determined by law. Article 17. The defense of the Fatherland and of its territorial integrity shall be the sacred duty of all Malians. Article 18. The payment of taxes shall be the duty of all, in conformity with the laws in force. Article 19. Every person dwelling within Malian territory must conform to the Constitution and other laws of the Republic. TITLE III -- THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 20. The President of the Republic is the Chief of State. He is the guardian of the Constitution. He shall assure the regular functioning of public powers, as well as the continuity of the State. The President of the Republic is the guarantor of national independence, of territorial integrity, and of treaties, conventions, and international accords. 4

Article 21. The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term of five years by universal direct suffrage. Candidates for the office of President of the Republic must be of Malian nationality, in possession of all their civil and political rights, and at least thirty-five years of age on the date of their election. Article 22. The national leadership of the Party shall designate the candidate for the Presidency of the Republic. This candidacy shall then be submitted to the votes of the electorate. Election dates shall be set by a decree of the Council of Ministers. Elections shall take place not less than twenty days and not more than forty days before the expiration of the term of the President then in office. Details and supervision of the balloting shall be established by law. The Supreme Court shall assure the honesty of these procedures, rule on election complaints and certify the results of the balloting. The President shall be eligible for reelection for an additional single term. Article 23. Before assuming office, the President of the Republic shall take the following oath before the National Assembly: "I swear before the Malian people to preserve faithfully the republican form of government, to observe the Constitution and the laws, and to see that they are observed by others, to carry out my duties in the higher interest of the people, and to preserve the independence and territorial integrity of the Fatherland." The duties of the President of the Republic shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other elective mandate, any profession, or any 5

commercial, financial or industrial activity. Article 24. In the event of temporary disability of the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly shall assume the duties of the former. Article 25. In the event of the resignation, permanent disability or death of the President of the Republic, the Presidency shall be temporarily assumed by the President of the National Assembly. Within fifty days from the date of the vacancy of the Presidency, an election shall be held to elect a new President of the Republic for a term of five years. Article 26. The President of the Republic shall address his letter of resignation to the national leadership of the Party, which shall inform the nation of the resignation within fortyeight hours. Article 27. The permanent disability of the President of the Republic, as established by a vote of two-thirds of the membership of the National Assembly and in consultation with the Supreme Court, shall be declared by the national leadership of the Party. Article 28. In the event of fundamental disagreement between the national leadership of the Party and the President of the Republic, an extraordinary congress may terminate the authority of the President by a vote of two-thirds of its membership. Article 29. The President of the Republic shall direct the political orientation of the State. Together with the National Assembly, he has the right to initiate laws. Article 30. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Ministers, who shall be responsible to him. He shall determine their areas of competence and shall set limits upon their powers.

6

ters.

He shall preside over the Council of Minis-

The President of the Republic shall be the head of the administration. He shall appoint the civilian and military employees of the State. He may delegate his power of appointment to another member of the Government. Members of the Supreme Court, the High Chancellor of National Orders, general officers, ambassadors and extraordinary envoys, and regional governors shall be appointed by the Council of Ministers. The law shall determine the selection of other employees, for which provision shall be made in the Council of Ministers. The President of the Republic shall sign and ratify treaties. He shall ary envoys to extraordinary accredited to accredit ambassadors and extraordinforeign powers; ambassadors and envoys of foreign powers shall be him.

He shall exercise the right of pardon in circumstances provided for by law. General amnesty shall be accorded by law. Article 31. The President of the Republic shall be the supreme commander of the armed forces. Article 32. If the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the State, territorial integrity, or the fulfillment of international obligations are threatened in a grave and imminent manner, or if the regular functioning of constitutional public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers and consultation with the presidents of the National Assembly and the Supreme Court, may carry out the extraordinary measures required by the circumstances. He shall so inform the nation. 7

During the exercise of these extraordinary powers, the National Assembly shall meet and may not be dissolved. However, if the regular functioning of the institutions of government is interrupted through a disagreement between the National Assembly and the President of the Republic, the latter shall be empowered, upon the express authorization of the national leadership of the Party, to dissolve the National Assembly. Elections for positions in the new Assembly shall take place not earlier than forty-five nor later than sixty days after this dissolution. No additional dissolution may take place in the year following this election. Article 33. The President of the Republic may declare martial law or a state of emergency in consultation with the Council of Ministers under the conditions specified in Article 51, below. Article 34. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the law within fifteen days following the communication to the Government of the adopted text. In case of emergency declared by the National Assembly, this period shall be reduced to eight days. Article 35. The President of the Republic may, during the period preceding promulgation, ask for reconsideration of the law. This reconsideration may not be refused. Article 36. If, after reconsideration, the National Assembly approves the text by a twothirds majority, the law shall be considered promulgated. Article 37. The President of the Republic, on the recommendation of the National Assembly, may submit to referendum any draft bill which appears to require the direct opinion of the people.

8

If the referendum leads to the adoption of the bill, the President shall promulgate it within the time specified in Article 34, above. TITLE IV -- THE GOVERNMENT Article 38. The Government shall be composed of the President of the Government and the Ministers. The President of the Republic shall be the President of the Government. Article 39. The duties of members of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of any elective mandate, public employment or any professional activity. Article 40. The President of the Republic shall have the right to indict at law any Minister by reason of infractions committed by the latter in the exercise of his office. TITLE V -- THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 41. Legislative power shall be conferred upon a single assembly, to be known as the National Assembly. The National Assembly shall be elected for a four-year term by universal suffrage in one round of balloting in single-member constituencies. Its members shall have the title of "Deputy." The number of deputies to the National Assembly, as well as their remuneration, conditions of eligibility, and reasons for ineligibility, shall be determined by law. Article 42. No member of the National Assembly may be prosecuted, called to account, arrested or tried because of his opinions or votes expressed in the exercise of his duties. Except in cases of flagrant dereliction, no member of the National Assembly may, while the Assembly is in session, be prosecuted or arrested

9

for criminal or summary offenses, except with the authorization of the National Assembly. When the Assembly is not in session no member may be arrested without the authorization of the officers of the National Assembly except in cases of flagrant dereliction, authorized prosecutions, or final conviction. Detention or prosecution of a member of the National Assembly shall be suspended if the Assembly so requests. Article 43. Precommitted votes shall be prohibited. The deputies' right to vote shall be personal. However, delegation of votes shall be permitted if it is impossible for a deputy to be present because of illness or authorized absence. No one may be delegated more than one vote for each balloting. Article 44. The National Assembly shall make the law. It shall meet in two ordinary sessions each year upon convocation by its President. However, the budget must be voted upon before the opening of the budgetary period. The duration of each ordinary session may not exceed two months. Article 45. The National Assembly may meet in extraordinary session on a day determined by order of the President of the Republic or at the request of a majority of the members of the National Assembly. If the extraordinary request of the members of cloture shall take effect for which the session was pleted. session is held at the the National Assembly, as soon as the agenda called has been com-

The length of the extraordinary session may not exceed twelve days. The President of the Republic alone may request a new session within one month following the decree of cloture. 10

Except for cases in which the National Assembly meets without need of sanction, extraordinary sessions shall be opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic. The national leadership of the Party shall designate the candidate for the Presidency of the National Assembly. This candidacy shall be submitted to the vote of the National Assembly. Article 46. The President of the National Assembly shall be elected for the duration of the legislature; however, he may be dismissed from office upon the written request of two-fifths of the deputies and by voice vote of two-thirds of the National Assembly. In the event of vacancy in the office of President of the National Assembly through death, resignation or any other cause, the National Assembly shall elect a new president within fifteen days following the vacancy, if the Assembly is in session. If the Assembly is not in session, it shall be convened. Each year, at the opening of the first ordinary session, the Assembly shall elect its officers and appoint its commissions. Article 47. The sessions of the National Assembly shall be public. However, it may meet in closed session at the request of the President of the Republic or of a majority of its members. The record of the activities of the National Assembly shall be published in the Journal Officiel. Article 48. Ministers may address the National Assembly or its specialized commissions. TITLE VI -- RELATIONS BETWEEN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENT Article 49. Government and private bills shall be presented for the deliberation of the 11

National Assembly fifteen days after their submission to the Bureau of the Assembly. They shall be adopted by a simple majority. The law shall determine the rules concerning: - the civic rights and fundamental guarantees accorded to citizens for the exercise of their public liberties; the constraints imposed by national defense upon the persons and p roperty of citizens; - citizenship, civil rights, the status of persons, marriage regulation, inheritance and gifts, regulation of property, civil and commercial obligations, regulation of corporate bodies, expropriation; - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as punishments appropriate thereto, penal procedure, criminal investigation, extradition, amnesty, determination of jurisdictions, the status of prosecutors and lawyers; - general and particular regulations concerning public officials; - the regulation of currency, the bases, rates and methods of tax collection. The law shall determine the fundamental principles of: - the general organization of defense and security; - regulations governing the right to work, social security, labor unions, and the organization and competence of professional associations; - education and scientific research; - public accounts; - the creation of public services and public bodies,; - the electoral regulations of the National

12

Assembly; - the self-administration of local units, their jurisdiction and their resources; - the conveyancing and management of State property; - the organization of production; - the organization of justice; - prison regulations. Appropriation bills shall determine the revenue and expenditures of the State. The economic plan shall be adopted by the National Assembly. It shall determine the economic and social objectives of the State. Article 50. The National Assembly may authorize the declaration of war. Article 51. Martial law or states of emergency shall be decreed in the Council of Ministers. Extension beyond fifteen days must be authorized by the National Assembly. Article 52. Matters other than those coming within the purview of the law shall be controlled by regulation. Article 53. The Government, in order to execute its program, may request from the National Assembly the authorization to carry out by ordinance, for a limited time, measures which are normally within the domain of the law. These ordinances shall be passed in the Council of Ministers after consultation with the Supreme Court. They shall take effect upon publication, but become void if the bill for ratification is not placed before the National Assembly before the date set by law. Upon the expiration of the period mentioned in the preceding paragraph of this article, these

13

ordinances may be modified only by law on matters which are in the legislative domain. Article 54. Bills and amendments which are not in the domain of the law or which are inconsistent with the delegation of powers provided for in Article 52, shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be declared by the President of the National Assembly of his own accord or at the request of the President of the Republic. In case of disagreement, the Supreme Court, at the request of either the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, shall resolve the question within eight days. Article 55. The initiative for proposing laws shall belong concurrently to the President of the Republic and to members of the National Assembly. Bills shall be deliberated in the Council of Ministers in consultation with the Supreme Court and submitted to the Bureau of the National Assembly. Article 56. Bills and amendments formulated by the members of the National Assembly shall not be admissible if their, adoption would entail an increase in public expenditure or a decrease in public revenue unless they are accompanied by a bill for an increase in revenue or equivalent economy. Article 57. Members of the Government and of the National Assembly shall have the right to propose amendments. After the opening of debate, the Government may oppose any amendment which has not been previously submitted to it. If the Government should request it, the National Assembly shall in a single vote express its opinion upon all or part of the text under consideration, retaining only those amendments proposed or accepted b y the Government.

14

Article 58. An emergency vote upon a law may be requested by the Government or by the deputies. If requested by the Government, it shall always be granted. If requested by the deputies, the National Assembly shall rule upon the emergency vote. Whenever an emergency vote is granted, the bill on that subject shall have priority on the agenda. Article 59. The National Assembly must consider the appropriations bill at the opening of the ordinary session preceding the fiscal period. The appropriations bill must anticipate the income necessary for meeting expenditures. If the National Assembly has not acted on this matter before the beginning of the fiscal period, or if it has not voted for a balanced budget, the Government shall resubmit the proposed budget within fifteen days to the National Assembly called into special session for this purpose. The National Assembly must then act within fifteen days. If this session does not bring about a balanced budget, the Government shall, in consultation with the Supreme Court, establish a balanced budget based upon the revenue of the preceding fiscal period. Article 60. The Government shall be required to furnish to the National Assembly any explanation concerning its conduct requested by the latter. TITLE VII -- TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 61. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties. He shall be informed of any negotiations likely to lead to an international agreement not submitted for ratification. Article 62. Treaties of peace or commerce, treaties or agreements regarding international organizations, treaties which commit the finances of the State, treaties regarding the status of 15

persons, and treaties or agreements concerning cession, exchange or addition of territory, may be ratified or approved only by virtue of a law. They shall take effect only after having been ratified or approved. No cession, exchange or addition of territory shall be valid without the approval of the populations concerned. Article 63. If the Supreme Court, when applied to by the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly, declares that a particular international obligation contains a provision contrary to the Constitution, authorization to ratify or approve it may be granted only after a revision of the Constitution. Article 64. Treaties or agreements regularly ratified or approved possess, from the date of proclamation, an authority superior to that of laws, but with due regard, in the case of each treaty or agreement, for its observance by the other party. TITLE VIII -- JUDICIAL AUTHORITY Article 65. Justice shall be meted out in the territory of the Republic in the name of the Malian people. The judicial authority shall be independent. It shall guarantee res p ect for the rights and liberties defined by the Constitution and by law. law. The position of judge shall be conferred by TITLE IX -- THE SUPREME COURT Article 66. The Supreme Court shall consist of: - a constitutional section;

16

- a judiciary section; - an administrative section; - an accounts section. Article 67. The Supreme Court shall be charged with overseeing the regularity of elections and announcing the results. It shall settle dis p uted elections. It may be consulted on government bills, private bills, and draft regulations. It shall take cognizance of the constitutionality of laws and international agreements. In these cases it shall act at the request of the President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly and must give its decision within fifteen days. In emergencies this period shall be reduced to eight days. TITLE X -- THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 68. The High Court of Justice shall be competent to pass judgment on the President of the Republic and on Ministers brought before it by the National Assembly on charges of indictable actions, crimes or misdemeanors committed in the exercise of their offices, as well as to pass judgment upon conspirators in any plot against the security of the State. Arraignment shall be publicly voted by a twothirds majority of the members of the National Assembly. The High Court of Justice shall be bound by the definitions of crimes and misdemeanors and by the penalties set forth in the penal laws in force at the time of the acts referred to in the proceedings. Article 69. The High Court of Justice shall be made up of members appointed by the National

17

Assembly at each new general election. It shall choose its President from among its members. The number of its members, its working rules, and the rules of procedure to be followed before it shall be determined by law. TITLE XI -- AFRICAN UNITY Article 70. The Republic of Mali shall be empowered to conclude with any African State treaties of association or partnership which may include partial or total renunciation of its sovereignty for the purpose of realizing African unity. TITLE XII -- CONSTITUTIONAL REVISION Article 71. Initiative for revision of the Constitution shall be vested concurrently with the President of the Republic and the Deputies. Article 72. The proposed constitutional revision must be approved by a three-fourths majority of the members of the National Assembly. The text of the proposed revision shall be submitted to referendum, unless the revision in question has been adopted by a four-fifths majority of the members of the National Assembly. Article 73. No proposed revision may be considered or carried out if it jeopardizes territorial integrity. TITLE XIII -- TERRITORIAL UNITS Article 74. The territorial units of the Republic shall be created by law. Article 75. These units shall be administered under conditions provided for by law. In territorial units the Government representative shall be charged with the interests of the 18

State, administrative supervision, and respect for the laws. TITLE XIV -- SPECIAL PROVISIONS Article 76. For a period of ten years from the date of promulgation of this Constitution, no person may be a member of the Party, the National Assembly, the Government or trade union boards who, previous to November 19, 1968, held any of the following positions: - Members of the National Political Bureau and of the National Committee for the Defense of the Revolution; - Members of the Legislative Delegation created by Ordinance No. 1 PG-RM of January 22, 1968; - General Secretaries of sections and subsections of the US-RDA; - Political Secretaries of sections and subsections of the same party; - Presidents of Local Committees for the Defense of the Revolution; - National or local leaders of the popular militia; - Zone chiefs and assistant chiefs; - Members of the governing board of the National Union of Malian Workers (UNTM). Article 77. The provisions of Article 76 shall be applicable to any person subjected to six months' imprisonment at the time of the events of November 19, 1968. TITLE XV -- TEMPORARY PROVISIONS Article 78. For a period of five years, the Military Committee of National Liberation shall 19

define and carry out the policy of the State. Article 79. This Constitution shall be submitted to a referendum on a date to be set by ordinance. It shall take effect after the installation of the future constitutional regime. The legislative and regulatory provisions necessary tor its implementation and for the setting up of organs of government shall be the subject, where necessary, of ordinances having the force of law or of decrees of the Government until the installation of the President of the Republic, the National Assembly, and the Government. Article 80. The authorities established in the Republic shall continue to exercise their functions, and the present institutions shall be maintained until the establishment of new authorities and institutions. Article 81. Legislation presently in force in Mali shall remain in force, barring enactment of new laws, insofar as this legislation contains nothing contrary to this Constitution.

20

