CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

MAURITANIA
by JAY A. SIGLER and MARK P. TARANTINO Translations by Jay A. Sigler and Patrice Rinaldo

Issued June 1986

Oceans Publications, Dobbs Ferry, New York

© Copyright 1986 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0 - 379 -00467 -4

CONSTITUTIONAL CHARTER OF THE MILITARY COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL SALVATION FEBRUARY 9, 1985. PREAMBLE Confident of the total power of Allah; As depositaries in the last resort of national legitimacy; Conscious of their responsibilities to the people, the Armed Forces took power on the 10th of May, 1978, to save the country and the nation from ruin or from dismemberment, and in order to safeguard national unity, the integrity of our territory, the continuation of the state and of national sovereignty. They proclaim their intention to respect all international agreements taken in the name of the state and to adhere to the principles consecrated by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man, of the United Nations Charter, the Orgnaization of African Unity and the Arab League of States. Islam is the religion of the state and of the people. The sole and unique source of law is the Islamic Shaaria. First Article - The clauses of the constitution of the 20th of May, 1961, relating to the exercise of legislative and executive power are abrogated. Art. 2 - The national armed forces exercise power through the Military Committee of National Salvation. Art. 3 - The Militray Committee of National Salvation holds executive power, which it exercises by means of ordinances. It conceives and determines the general political life of the nation. It orients and controls the actions of government. It authorizes the ratification of accords and international treaties. It dispenses the power of amnesty except for offenses against the Ghissass and the Houddoud. Art. 4 - The Military Committee of National Salvation appoints its president in the manner prescribed by the internal rules of the Committee. Art. 5 - The members of the Military Committee of National Salvation are appointed by ordinances of the Military Committee of National Salvation. Art. 6 - The decisions or deliberations of the Military Committee of National Salvation are taken according to the internal rules of the Military Committee of National Salvation. Art. 7 - The Military Committee of National Salvation is assembled in ordinary session every three months, and in extraordinary session on the call of its President, following the approval of the Permanent Committee, or on the request of one-third of its members. A permanent Committee is at the center. Taking part in this Permanent Committee are all the members of the Military Committee of National Salvation at Nouakchott. Art. 8 - The Permanent Committee of the M.C.N.S. meets in ordinary session once every five days and is brought into extraordinary session by its President on the request of one-third of its members. Art. 9 - The President of the Military Committee of National Salvation is the chief of state. He exercises the executive power. Under this title he is responsible to the Military Committee of National Salvation. He promulgates the ordinances of the M.C.N.S. in the name of the Military Committee of National Salvation.

II

Art. 10 - In cases of the temporary absence of the President of the M.C.N.S., the head of state, the conduct of current affairs is entrusted to a member of the Permanent Committee. In case of the impeachment of the President of the Military Committee of National Salvation, the head of state, the Permanent Committee appoints at its center one member to expedite current and urgent affairs for one period not exceeding one month. After this period the Military Committee of National Salvation shall meet to evaluate this impeachment. In case of the definitive impeachment of the President of the M.C.N.S. the functions of the President of the Military Committee of National Salvation, the head of state, will be secured by one member designated by the Permanent Committee in its center for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. At the end of this period, the M.C.N.S. shall meet to select a new President. Art. 11 - The President of the Military Committee of National Salvation, the head of state, appoints the members of the government after receiving the consent of the M.C.N.S. Nevertheless, he can terminate the services of one or several of the ministers and proceed to replace them. Art. 12 - The President of the Military Committee of National Salvation, the head of state, appoints civil and military employees. He is the supreme head of the national armed forces. He accredits ambassadors and extraordinary envoys of foreign powers. Ambassadors and extraordinary envoys are accredited by him. He signs and ratifies treaties and international accords. He may bestow pardons with the exception of those condemned to the punishment of Ghissass and of Houddoud. Art. 13.- A state of seige or of emergency may be declared by the President of the Military Committee of National Salvation, the head of state, upon the approval of the Military Committee of National Salvation. Art. 14. - The present charter will remain in force until the construction of democratic institutions. This will be completed, if necessary, by constitutional ordinances. Art. 15. - The legislation and regulations in force remain applicable unless they would have been modified by the pattern ennsaged by the present charter. Art. 16. - The present charter will be published following emergency procedure in the Official Journal. Done in Nouakchott, February 9, 1985. For the Military Committee of National Salvation President: Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya

12

