CONSTITUTION. (Promulgated February 5, 1857) PREAMBLE. In the name of God and by the authority of the Mexican people. The representatives of the dif-ferent States, of the District and of the Territories which compose the Republic of Mexico, called upon by the provisions of the "plan" pro-claimed in Ayutla the first of March, eighteen hundred and fifty-four, amended in Acapulco the eleventh day of the same month and year, and by the summons issued the seventeenth of October, eighteen hundred and fifty five, to convene for the purpose of framing a constitution for the nation and making it a popular representative, democratic republic, exercising the powers with which they are vested, do hereby comply with the require-mentsof theirhigh office,by decree-ing the following political Consti-tution of the Mexican. Republic, on the indestructible basis of its legitimate independence, pro-claimed the sixteenth of Septem-ber, eighteen hundred and ten, and consummated the twenty-seventh of September, eighteen hundred and twenty-one. TITLE I. SECTION I. Tie, r;ghtr of man. ARTICLE 1. The Mexican people recognize that the rights of man are the basis and the object of social institutions. Consequently25, they declare that all the laws and all the authorities of the country must respect and maintain the guaranties which the present Con-stitution establishes. ART. 2. In the Republic all are born free. Slaves who set foot upon the national territory re-cover, by that act alone, their liberty, and have a right to the protection of the laws. ART. 3. Instruction is free. The law shall determine what profes-sions require a diploma for their exercise, and what requisites are necessary to obtain said diplomas. ART. 4. Every man is free to engage in any honorable and use-ful profession, industrial pursuit, or occupation suitable to him, and to avail himself of its products. The exercise of this liberty shall not be hindered except by judicial sentence when such exercise at-tacks the rights of a third party, or by executive order issued in the manner specified 1y law, when it offends the rights of society. (ART.5. Nooneshallbecompelled to render personal services without just compensation, and without his full consent. The law shall not permit any contract, compact, or agreement to be entered into hav-ing for its object the loss, or irre-vocable sacrifice of the liberty of man, whether it be in relation to labor, education, or a religious vow. Nor shall it allow any agree-ment by which a man stipulates his proscription or banishment.a) ART. 6. The expression of ideas shall not be the object of any judi-cial or executive investigation, ex-cept in case it attacks morality, the rights of a third party, provokes crime or misdemeanor, or disturbs public order. (ART. 7. The liberty to write and to publish writings on an)- subject is inviolable. No law or authorityshall establish previous censorship, or require authors or printers to give bond, or restrict the liberty of the press, which has no other limits than respect of private life, moral-ity, and the public peace. Trials for off enses committed through the press shall be held before a jury which shall pass upon the facts and another jury which shall ap-ply the law and fix the penalty to be imposed.,,) ART. 8. The right of petition, exercised in writing in a peaceful and respectful manner, is inviola-ble; but in political matters only citizens of the Republic may ex-ercise it. To every petition an answer shall be given in writing, in the form of a decree, by the offi-cial to whom it may have been addressed, and the said official is bound to make the petitioner ac-quainted with the result. ART. 9. No one shall be deprived of the right to peaceably associate or unite with others for any lawful purpose; but only citizens of the Republic are permitted to take part in the political affairs of the country. No armed reunion has the right to deliberate. ART. 1. Everyman has the right to possess and carry arms for his security and legitimate defense. The law shall designate what arms are prohibited, and the punish-ment to be incurred by those who carry them. ART. 11. Every man has the right to enter and leave the Republic, to travel through its territory, and change his residence, with-out the necessity of a letter of security, passport, safe conduct, or other similar requisite. The exercise of this right shall not affect the legitimate faculties of the judicial or executive author-ities in cases of criminal or civil responsibility.pueblo, la ART. 12. No titles of nobility, or prerogatives, or hereditary honors, are, or shall be recognized in the Republic. Only the people, legitimately represented, may de-cree recompenses in honor of those who have rendered or may render eminent services to the country or to humanity. ART. 13. In the Mexican Repub-lic no one shall be tried according to special laws, or by special tribunals. No person or corporation shall have privileges or enjoy emoluments which are not in compensation for a public service and established by law. Military jurisdiction shall be recognized only for the trial of criminal cases having strict con-nection with military discipline. The law shall clearly set forth the cases included in this exception. ART. 14. No retroactive law shall be enacted. No person shall be tried or sentenced except under laws previously enacted, exactly applicable to the case, and by a tribunal previously established by law. ART. 15. No treaty shall be made for the extradition of political of-fenders, or of offenders of the common class, who have been slaves in the country where the offense was committed: nor shall any agreement or treaty be entered into which abridges or modifies the guaranties and rights which this Constitution grants to the man and to the citizen. ART. 16. No one shall be mo-lested in his person, family, domi-cile, papers or possessions, except by virtue of an order in writing of the competent authority, setting forth the legal grounds upon which the measure is taken. in cases of in flagran te delieto any person may apprehend the offender and his accomplices, placing them without delay at the disposal of the nearest authorities.6. ART. 17. No one shall be arrested for debts of a purely civil char-acter. No one shall exercise vio-lence in order to enforce his rights. The tribunals shall always be open for the administration of justice, which shall be gratuitous, judicial costs being consequently abolished. ART. 18. Imprisonment shall take place only for crimes deserv-ing corporal punishment. In any stage of the case in which it shall appear that such a punishment can not be imposed upon the accused, he shall be set at liberty on bail. In no case shall the imprisonment or detention be prolonged for fail-ure to pay fees, or any other pe-cuniary charge. ART. 19. No detention shall ex-ceed the term of three days, unless justified by a warrant, issued in accordance to law, and giving the grounds for the imprisonment. The mere lapse of said time shall render the authority that orders or consents to it and the agents, min-isters, wardens, orjailers who exe-cute it, responsible the refor. Any maltreatment in the apprehension or in the confinement of the prison-ers, any molestation which may be inflicted without legal ground, or any tax or contribution in the prisons, is an abuse which the laws must correct and the authorities severely punisb. ART. 20. In every criminal trial the accused shall have the follow-inog guaranties: 1. That the grounds of the pro-ceedings and the name of the ac-cuser, if there shall be one, be made known to him. II. That his preliminary exam-ination b made within forty-eight hours, to be counted from the time he may be placed at the disposal of the judge. lII. That he be confronted with the witnesses who testify against him.IV. That he be furnished with all the information on record, which he may need for his de-fense. V. That he be heard in his de-fense, either personally or by counsel, or by both, as he may de-sire. In case he should have no one to defend him, a list of official counselors shall be shown to him, in order that he may choose one or more to act as his counsel. ART. 21. The imposition of pen-alties properly so called belongs ex-clusively to the judicial authority. The political or executive authori-ties shall only have power to im-pose fines and imprisonment, as disciplinary measures, the former of no more than five hundred dol-lars, and the latter for no more than one month, in the cases and in the manner which the law shall ex-pressly determine. ART. 22. Punishments by niuti-lation and infamy, by branding, flogging, beating with sticks, tor-ture of whatever kind, excessive fines, confiscation of property, or any other penalties, unusual, or working corruption of blood, shall be forever prohibited. ART. 23. In order to abolish the penalty of death, the execu-tive power shall establish, as soon as possible, a penitentiary system. In the meantime the penalty of death shall be abolished for polit - ical offenses, and shall not be im-posed except in cases of treason during a foreign war, highway robbery, arson, parricide, murder in the first degree, grave offenses of military character, and piracy as defined by law. ART. 24. No criminal case shall have more than three instances. No person, whether acquitted or condemned, shall be tried again for the same offense. Verdicts of not proven are abolished.September 25, 1873, see page 71. ART. 25. Correspondence sent through the mails is inviolable. The violation of this guaranty is an offense which the law shall pun-ish severely. ART. 26. In time of peace no soldier may demand quarters, sup-plies, or other real or personal service, without the consent of the proprietor. In time of war he may do so, but only in the manner prescribed by the law. ART. 27. Private property shall not be condemned without the consent of the owner, except for public use, and upon previous indemnification. The law hall determine the authority which may make the condemnation and the conditions on which it may be carried out. (No corporation, civil or eccle-siastical, whatever its character, denomination, or object may be, shall have legal capacity to acquire the ownership or administration of real estate, excepting only the buildings destined immediately and directly to the service and object of the institution.,) ART. 28. There shall be no mo-nopolies of any kind, whether gov-ernmental or private, nor prohibi-tions whatever even if under cover of protection to industry. The Government's exclusive right to coin money, and manage the postal service, and the privileges which, for a limited time, the law may concede to inventors or im-provers of inventions, are excep-tions to this rule. ART. 29. In cases of invasion, grave disturbance of the public peace, or any other emergency which may place society in grave danger, the President of the Re-public, and no one else, shall have the power to suspend, with the advice of the council of ministers and with the approval of the Con-MEXICAN STATES. gress of the Union, and, in the recess thereof, of the Permanent Committee, the guaranties estab-lished by this Constitution, ex-cepting those relating to the life of man; but such suspension, which in no case shall be confined in its effects to a particular in-dividual, shall be made by means of a general order, or decree, and only for a limited time. If the suspension takes place during the session of Congress, this body shall concede the author-izations which it may deem neces-sary in order that the Executive may properly meet the situation. If the suspension takes place during the recess, the Permanent Committee shall, without delay, call Congress to assemble in order that it may make the concession. SECTION II. iIeK'/can'. ART. 30. Mexicans are: I. All those born, within or without the Republic, of Mexican parents. II. Foreigners naturalized in conformity with the laws of the Federation. III. Foreigners who acquire real estate in the Republic. or have Mexican children, if they do not declare their intention to retain their nationality of origin. ART. 31. It is the duty of every Mexican: I. To defend the independence, the territory, the honor, the rights and interests of his country. II. To contribute in the propor-tional and equitable manner pro-vided by law, to meet the public expenses of the Federation, the State and the municipality in which he resides. ARiT. 32. Mexicans shall be pre-ferred under equal circumstances to foreigners, for all public employ-ments, charges, or commissions,when the citizenship is not indis-pensable. Laws shall be enacted to improve the condition of indus-trious Mexicans, by rewarding those who distinguish themselves in any science or art, promoting labor, and founding colleges and manual training schools. SECTION III. Fo' iq (gns ART. 33. Foreigners are those who do not possess the qualifica-tions determined in article 30. They have a right to the guaran-ties established by Section 1, Title I, of the present Constitution, ex-cept that in all cases the Govern-ment has the right to expel perni-cious foreigners. They are under obligation to contribute to the pub-lic expenses in the manner which the laws may provide, and to obey and respect the institutions, laws, and authorities of the country, subjecting themselves to the de-cisions of the tribunals, without power to seek other protection than that which the laws concede to Mexican citizens. SECTION IV. Jlk xican c/t'i.-FiN. ART. 34. Citizens of the Repub-lic are all those who, in addition to the quality of Mexicans, haye the following qualifications: 1. To have completed the age of eighteen 'years if they are married, or of twenty-one if not married. II. To have an honest means of livelihood. ART. 35. The prerogatives of the citizen are: I. To vote at popular elections. II. To be eligible for any office or position of popular election,MEXICAN STATES. ' and be qualified for serving offices of other kinds, if having the other qualities required by law. III. To associate with others to discuss the political affairs of the country. IV. To enlist in the army or in the national guard for the defense of the Republic and its institu-tions. V. To exercise in all kinds of business the right of petition. ART. 36. It shall be the duty of every citizen of the Republic: I. To register in the list of the inhabitants of the municipality in which he lives, stating the prop-erty which he owns, if any, or the industry, profession, or labor by which he subsists. II. To enlist in the national guard. lII. To vote at popular elections in the district to which he belongs. 1V. To fill the federal offices to which he may be elected, and which in no case shall be gratuitous. ART. 37. The character of citi-zen is lost: I. By naturalization in a foreign country. II. By officially serving the gov-ernment of another country or accepting its decorations, titles, or employment without previous permission from the Federal Con-gress; excepting literary, scien-tific, and humanitarian titles, which may be accepted freely. ART. 38. The law shall determine the cases and the form in which the rights of citizenship may be lost or suspended, and the manner in which they may be regained. TITLE II. SECTION I. National sovereignty and form of government. ART. 39. The national sover-eignty is vested essentially andoriginally in the people. Allpublic power emanates from the people, and is instituted for their benefit. The people have at all times the inalienable right to alter or modify the form of their government. ART. 40. It is the will of the Mexi-can people to constitute themselves into a democratic, Federal, repre-sentative Republic, consisting of States, free and sovereign in all that concerns their internal gov-ernment, but united in a federation according to the principles of this fundamental law. ART. 41. The people exercise their sovereignty through the Fed-eralpowers inthematters belonging to the Union, and through those of the States in the matters relating to the internal regime of the latter. This power shall be exercised in the manner respectively estab-lished b~y the Constitutions, both Federal and State. The latter shall in no case contravene the stip-ulations of the Federal Compact. SECTION II. Th t I(/]j)(ts oftl eFederation an d natioml teuu;tory. ART. 42. The national territory comprises the integral parts of the Federation and the adjacent islands in both oceans. (ART. 43. The integral parts of the Federation are : the States of Aguascalientes, Colima, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Jalisco, M4xico, Mi-choacln, Nuevo Leon and Coa-huila, Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro, Sn Luis Potosi, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala, Valle de Me'xico, Vera Cruz, Yu-cat6n, Zacatecas. and the Territory of Lower California.a) ART. 44. The States of Aguas-calientes, Chiapas, Chihuahua,Durango, Guerrero, Mexico, Pue-bla, Queretaro, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tamaulipas, and the Territory of Lower California shall preserve the limits which they now have. ART. 45. The States of Colima and Tlaxcala shall preserve in their new character of States the limits which they had as Territories of the Federation. ART. 46. The State of the Val-ley of Mexico shall consist of the territory constituting at present the Federal District, but it shall not be a State until after the su-preme Federal Powers move to some other place. ART. 47. The State of Nuevo Le6n and Coahuila shall comprise the territory formerly belonging to the two separate States of which it now consists, except a part of the Bonanza Hacienda, which shall be added to Zacatecas, exactly as it was before its annexation to Coa-huila. ART. 48. The States of Guana-juato, Jalisco, Michoac'in, Oaxaca, San Luis Potosi, Tabasco, Vera Cruz, Yucatan, and Zacatecas shall recover the extent and limits which they bad on the thirty-first of De-cember, eighteen hundred and fifty-two, with the alterations estab-lished in the following article. ART. 49. The town of Conte-pee, nowbelonging to Guanajuato, shall be annexed to Michoac6n. The municipality of Ahualulco, belonging to Zacatecas, shall be annexed to San Luis Potosi. The municipalities of Ojo Caliente and San Francisco de los Adames, be-longing to San Luis, as well as the towns of Nueva Tlaxcala and San Andres del Teul, belonging to ,Jalisco, shall be annexed to Zacatecas. The department of Tdxpam shall continue to form a part of Vera Cruz. The canton of Huimanguillo, belonging to Vera Cruz, shall be annexed to Tabasco.CONSTITUTION. DIVISION OF POWERS. ART. 50. The supreme power of the Federation is divided for its exercise into legislative, executive, and judicial. Two or more of these powers shall never be united in one person or corporation, nor shall the legislative power be vested in one individual. SECTION I. (ART. 51. The supreme legisla-tive power of the nation is vested in an assembly to be called "The Congress of the Union."a) PARAGRAPIH 1. Election anl installation of ( T p'.ha 1(ART. 52. The Congress of the Union shall consist of representa-tives, all of whom are to be elected every two years by the Mexican citizens.(,) ART. 53. One representative shall be elected for each forty thousand inhabitants, or for a frac-tion thereof which exceeds twenty thousand. The territory in whic'h the population is less than that determined in this article sdiall, nevertheless, elect one represent-ative. ART. 54. For each representa-tive there shall be elected one substitute. ART. 55. The election of repre-sentatives shall be indirect in the first degree, and by secret ballot, in the manner which the electoral law shall provide. ART. 56. Representatives shall have the following qualifications: To be Mexican citizens in the en-joyment of their rights; to be twenty-five years of age on the day of the opening of the ses'sion; TITLE III.MEXICAN STATES. 1874. See pages 7?, 73. to be residents of the State or Territory in which the election is held, and not to belono, to the ecclesiastical state. Residence is not lost by absence in the dis-charge of a public office of popu-lar election.) (ART. 57. The position of repre-sentative is incompatible with any salaried commission or office of the Uinion.a) (ART. 58. Representatives shall be disqualified, from the day of their election to the day on which their trust is concluded, from ac-cepting any salaried commission or office from the Federal Executive, except with previous permission of the Congress. The same requisite is necessary for the substitutes, when in the exercise of their functions a) (ART. 59, Representatives shall be inviolable for their opinions manifested in the performance of their duties, and shall never be liable to be called to account for them,.") (ART. 60. The Congress shall be the judge of the election of its mem-bers, and shall pass upon any ques-tion which may arise concerning the same.,,) (ART. 61. The Congress shall not open its sessions nor perform its functions without the presence of a quorum consisting of more than one-half of the whole number of its members; but those present shall meet on the day fixed by the law and compel the attendance of the absentees under the penalties es-tablished for that purpose.a) (ART. 62. The Congress shall have each year two periods of or-dinary sessions: the first shall begin on the sixteenth of Septem-ber and end on the fifteenth of December, and the second, which can not be extended, shall begin on the first of April and end on the last day of May.a)ART. 63. At the opening of the sessions of the Congress the Presi-dent of the Union shall be present and make a speech in which he shall give information of the state of the country. The president of the Congress shall reply in general terms. (ART. 64. All aets of the Con-gress shall have the character either of laws or of economical resolutions. W-hen transmitted to the Executive, the laws shall be signed by the president and two secretaries, and the economical res-olutions by only two secretaries.(t) PARAGRAPH II. Origin an 1forljtion, of tlw lan's. ART. 65. The right to originate legislation belongs: 1. To the President of the Union. II. To the members of Con-gress. Ill. To the legislatire, of the States.a Air. 66. Bills introduced by the President of the Republic, or )y the legislatures or deputations of the States, shall imlnediatelv be referred to the proper committee. Those introduced by inen bers of Congress shall be subject to the procedure established by the rules." ART. 67. Bills rejected by the Congress shall not be reintroduced during the sessions of that year.a ART. 68. The second period of sessions shall be devoted with pref-erence over all other matters, to the making of the necessary appropri-ations for the support of the Gov-ernment in the following fiscal year, the levying of the taxes nec-essary to meet the expenses, and the examination of the accounts of the past year submitted by the Executive.(ART. 69. The Executive shall send to the Congress on the last day but one of the first period of its sessions an estimate of expenses for the following year and the accounts of the preceding year. Both documents shall be referred to a committee of five representa-tives appointed on the same day, which shall examine them, and re-port at the second meeting of the second period.,a) (ART. 70. All bills shall go through the following stages: I. Examination and report by a committee. II. One or two debates, in the manner to be set forth in the fol-lowing clauses. III. The first debate shall take place on the day set apart for that purpose by the president of the Congress, according to the rules. IV. When the debate is closed a copy of the record thereof shall be sent to the Executive, in order that within the period of seven days it may express its opinion or waive the right to express it. V. If the opinion of the Execu-tive is in favor of the bill a vote shall be taken on it without further debate. VI. If the opinion of the Exec-utive is not in favor of the bill, whether wholly or in part, the bill shall be recommitted, in order that the observations made against it may be taken into consideration. VII. The new report of the committee shall then be discussed, and when the debate is closed a vote shall be taken upon it. VIII. Approval by absolute majority of the representatives presenta) (ART. 71. In case of notorious urgency, declared by a vote of two-thirds of the members present, the Congress can suspend the rulesand proceed without the formali-ties established in article 70.0) PARAGRAPH III. Powers of Congress. ART. 72. The Congress has power: I. To admit new States or Ter-ritories into the Federal Union, incorporating them in the nation. II. To turn Territories into States when they shall have a Eopulation of eighty thousand in-abitants and the necessary ele-ments to provide for their political existence. (III. To form new States within the limits of those now existing, when so requested by eighty thou-sand of their inhabitants, and upon proof that they have the necessary elements to meet the exigencies of their political existence. In all cases the Congress shall hear the opinion of the legislatures of the States to which the measure refers, and its decision shall be carried into effect only if ratified by a majority of the State legislatures. a) IV. To settle finally the limits of the States, terminating the dif-ferences which may arise between them relative to the demarcation of their respective territories, ex-cept when the differences are of judicial character. V. To change the residence of the supreme powers of the Fed-eration. VI. To provide for the internal organization of the Federal Dis-trict and Territories, upon the basis that the citizens shall choose by popular election the political, municipal, and judicial authorities, and endow them with the revenue necessary to cover their local ex-penses. VII. To approve the estimates of the Federal expenses, which theMEXICAN STATES. Executive shall annually submit to it, and order the taxes neces-sary to meet said expenses to be levied and collected. V III. To establish the bases upon which the Executive may make loans on the credit of the nation; to approve said loans and to recog-nize and order the payment of the national debt. 1X. To enact laws fixing the duties to be levied on foreign com-merce, and prevent, by general provisions, onerous restrictions from being established on the com-merce between the States. (X. To establish the general bases of commercial legislation.a) XI. To create or abolish Fed-eral offices, and to fix, increase, or decrease their salaries. XII. To confirm the nomina-tions, made by the Executive, of ministers, diplomatic agents, and consuls, superior officers of the treasury, colonels and other su-perior officers of the national army and navy. XIL. To approve the treaties. agreements, or diplomatic conven-tions which the Executive may make. XIV. To declare war, upon ex-amination of the facts submitted by the Executive. XV. To regulate the manner in which letters of marque may be issued; to enact laws according to which the prizes on sea and land shall be adjudged good or bad; and to frame the maritime law of peace and war. XVI. To grant or refuse per-mission to foreign troops to enter the territory of the Republic, and to allow fleets of other powers to remain for more than one month in the waters of the Republic.CONSTITUTION. (XVII. To permit national troops to go beyond the limits of the Republic.") XVIII. To raise and maintain the army and navy of the Union, and regulate their organization and service. XIX. To make rules for the organization, armament, and dis-cipline of the national guard, re-serving respectively to the citizens who compose it the appointment of the commanders and officers, and to the States the power of instruct-ing it in conformity with the dis-cipline prescribed by said regula-tions. XX. To consent to the use by the Executive of the national guardt outside of its respective States and Territories, determining the strength of the force required. XXI. To enact laws on natu-ralization, colonization, and citi-zenship. XXII. To enact laws on the general means of communication and on post-roads and post-offices. XXIII. To establish mints, reg-ulate the value and kinds of the national coin, determine the value of foreign coins, and adopt a gen-eral system of weights and meas-ures. XXIV. To make rules for the occupation and sale of public lands and the prices thereof. XXV. To grant pardons for offenses subject to federal jurisdic-tion. (XXVI. To grant rewards for eminent services rendered to the country or to humanity, and priv-ileges for a limited time to invent-ors and improvers of industrial devises. b) XXVII. To extend for thirty working days the first period of its ordinary sessions.MEXICAN STATES. 1896. See page 91. XXVIII. To make rules for its internal government and take the necessary measures to compel the attendance of absent members, and punish the faults or omissions of those present. XXIX. To appoint and remove freely the employees in the offices of its secretary, and paymaster, which offices shall be organized as the law may provide. (XXX. To enact all laws which may be necessarv and proper to enforce the foregoing powers and all others granted by this Consti-tution Co the authorities of the Union.a) PARAGRAPH IV. The permanent committee. (ART. 73. During the recesses of Congress there shall be a per-manent committee consisting of a representative for each State and Territory, appointed by the Con-gress on the eve of the close of its sessions.") ART. 74. The powers of the permanent committee shall be the following: I. To give its consent to the use of the national guard in the cases mentioned in article 72, Clause XX. (II. To call, on its own motion, or at the request of the Executive, an extra session of Congress.,) 111. To approve the appoint-ments referred to in article 85, Clause III. (IV. To administer the oath of office to the President of the Re-public, and to the justices of the supreme court in the cases pro-vided for by this Constitution.") V. To prepare a report upon all pending matters, in order that the next legislature may immediatelytake them up as unfinished busi-ness. el SECTION II. Execrative power. ART. 75. The exercise of the supreme executive power of the Union is vested in a single individ-ual, who shall be called "President of the United Mexican States." ART. 76. The election of Presi-dent shall be indirect in the first degree, and by secret ballot, in such manner as may be prescribed by the electoral law. ART. 77. No person shall be eligible to the position of Presi-dent who is not a Mexican citizen by lirth, in the exercise of his rights,, thirty-five years old at the time of the election, not belonging to the ecclesiastical state, and a resident of the country at the time in which the election is held. (ART. 78. The President shall enter upon the performance of the duties of his office on the first of December, and shall con-tinue in office four years.a) (AlRT. 79. In the temporary a-cancies of the office of President of the Republic, and in the absolute vacancy until the inauguration of the newly elected President, the chief justice of the supreme court shall act as President.6) (ART. 80. In case of absolute vacancy of the office of President a new election shall be held in ac-cordance with the provisions of article 76, and the newly elected President shall perform his func-tions until the last day of Novem-ber of the fourth year following his election.c) ART. 81. The President of the Union can not resign his position, except for grave cause, approved by Congress, to which the resig-nation shall be tendered.MEXICAN STATES. el 86. bAmended April 24, 1896. See page 94. el (ART. 82. If for any reason what-ever the election of President is not made and published by the first of December, on which day the transfer of the office should be made, or if the President-elect is not then ready to enter upon the discharge of his duties, the former President shall cease, nevertheless, and the executive power shall be vested (I ;nterbl in the chief jus-tice of the supreme court.,) (ART. 83. The President, on tak-ing possession of his office, shall take before Congress, and in its recess before the pernanent con-mittee, the following oath: " I swear to perform loyally and patriotically the duties of Presi-dent of the United Mexican States, according to the Constitution, hav-ing always in view the welfare and prosperity of the Union."' ) ART. 84. The President shall not leave the place of residence of the Federal powvers, nor lay aside the exercise of his functions, with-out grave cause, approved by the Congress, and in its recesses by the permanent committee. ART. 85. The powers and duties of the President are the following: 1. To promulgate and execute the laws passed by the Congress of the Union, providing, within the Executive sphere, for their exact observance. II. To appoint and remove freely the secretaries of state, to remove the diplomatic agents and superior officers of the treasury, and to appoint and remove freely the other federal officials whose appointment or removal is not otherwise provided for in the Con-stitution or the laws. III. To appoint, with the appro-val of Congress, and, in its recess, of the permanent committee, min-CONSTITUTION. isters, diplomatic agents, and con-suls-general. JV. To appoint, with the ap-proval of Congress, colonels and other superior officers of the national army and navy, and supe-rior officers of the treasury. V. To appoint all other officers of the national army and navy, according to the laws. VI. To dispose of the perma-nent land and sea forces for the security and defense of the Fed-eration. VII. To dispose of the national guard for the same purposes, in the manner provided by article 72, clause XX. VIII. Todeclarewarin the name of the United Mexican States, after the passage of the necessary law by the Congress of the Union. IX. To grant letters of marque, upon the bases fixed by the Con-gress. X. To conduct diplomatic nego tiations and to make treaties with foreign powers, submitting them for ratification to the Federal Con- XI. To receive ministers and other envoys from foreign powers. XII. To call, upon resolution of the permanent committee, an extra session of Congress. XIII. To give the judicial power the assistance which may be nec-essary for the free exercise of its functions. XIV. To open all classes of ports, establish maritime and fron-tier custom-houses and designate their location. (XV. To grant, according to law. pardons to criminals sen-tenced for offenses within the juris-diction of the Federal tribunals.a) ART. 86. For the transaction of the business of the executive de-partment of the Federation there shall be the number of secretariesMEXICAN STATES. which the Congress may fix by law, said law to provide also for the distribution of business among the different secretaries. ART. 87. No person shall be ap-pointed Secretary who is not a Mexican citizen by birth, in the exercise of his rights, and twenty-five years old. ART. 88. All rules, decrees, and orders of the President shall be signed by the secretary of the department to which the subject belongs. Without this requisite they shall not be obeyed. ART. 89. The Secretaries shall, as soon as the sessions of the first period are opened, render an ac-count to the Congress of the state of their respective departments. SECTION III. Judicial power. ART. 90. The judicial power of the Federation is vested in a su-preme court and in the district and circuit courts. ART. 91. The supreme court shall consist of eleven justices, four supernumerary j ustices, one attor-ney-general, and one solicitor-general. ART. 92. The justices of the su-preme court shall serve for six years, and their election shall be indirect in the first degree, in the manner established by the elec-toral law. ART. 93. No person shall be eligible to the position of justice of the supreme court who, in the judgment of the electors, is not learned in the science of law, thirty-five years of age, and a Mexican citizen by birth, in the exercise of his rights. (ART. 94. The justices of the supreme court shall, on enter-ing upon the exercise of their functions, take an oath before Congress, and, in its recesses,September'25, 1873. See page 70. la before the permanent committee, in the following form: " Do you swear to perform loyally and patriotically the functions of jus-tice of the supreme court of jus-tice, which the people have con-ferred upon you, in conformity with the Constitution, hasing al-ways in view the welfare and pros-perity of the Union " a) ART. 95. No resignation of the position of justice of the supreme court shall be admitted, except for grave cause, approved )y the Con-gress, to whom the resignation shall'be tendered. In the recesses of the Congress the power to act on this matter belongs to the per-manent committee. ART. 96. The law shall establish and organize the circuit and dis-trict courts. ART. 97. The Federal tribunals shall take cognizance of: (I. All controversies which may arise in regard to the compliance with and application of the Federal laws.b) II. All cases pertaining to mari-time law. III. All cases to which the Fed-eration may be a party. IV. All cases which may arise between two or more States. V. All cases which may arise between a State and one or more citizens of another State. VI. All civil or criminal cases that may arise out of treaties with foreign powers. VII. All cases concerning diplo-matic agents and consuls. ART. 98. The supreme court shall have original jurisdiction of controversies which- may arise between one State and another, and of those to which the Union may be a party. ART. 99. The supreme court shall also have power to settlequestions of jurisdiction between Federal tribunals, between these tribunals and those of the States, or between those of one State and those of another. ART. 100. In all the other cases mentioned in article 97, the su-preme court shall be either a court of appeals, or a court of last resort, as may be defined by the law regu-lating the jurisdiction of the cir-cuit and district courts. ART. 101. The tribunals of the Federation shall decide all ques-tions arising out of: I. Laws or acts of whatever au-thority violating individual guar-anties. II. Laws or acts of the Federal authority encroaching upon or re-stricting the sovereignty of the States. II1. Laws or acts of the State authorities invading the sphere of the Federal authority. ART. 102. All the cases referred to in the preceding article shall be conducted, on petition of the ag-grieved party, according to rules of proceedings which a special law shall establish. The decision shall always be rendered in such a lan-guage as to exclusively affect the individuals concerned in the case, limiting itself to defend and protect them in the special case to which the proceedings refer, without making any general declaration respecting the law or the act which gave rise to the case. TITLE IV. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PUBLIC FUNCTIONARIES. (ART. 103. Members of the Con-gress of the Union, the chief jus-tice and associate justices of the supreme court, and the members of the cabinet are responsible for the common offenses which they may commit during their terms of office, and for the crimes, niisde-meanors, or omissions of which they may be guilty in the perform-ance of their official duties. Gov-ernors of the States are likewise responsible for the violation of the Constitution and Federal laws. The President of the Republic is also responsible; but no charge shall be made against him, during his term of office, except for treason against the country, express viola-tion of the Constitution, attack on the freedom of election, and grave offenses of common character.a) (ART. 104. If the crime should be a common one, the Congress, acting as a grand jury, shall de-clare, by absolute majority of votes, whether or not there is sufficient ground to proceed against the ac-cused. In the negative case, there shall be no ground for further proceeding; in the affirmative, the accused shall be, by the said act, deprived of his office, and sub-jected to the action of the ordinary tribunals, a) (ART. 105. The Congress shall take cognizance of official crimes, as a jury of accusation, and the su-preme court as a court of im-peachment. The jury of accusation shall declare, by absolute majority of votes, whether or not the accused shall be impeached. If the decla-ration is in the negative, the func-tionary shall continue in the exer-cise of -his office; if it is in the affirmative, he shall be immedi-ately deprived of his office, and placed at the disposal of the su-preme court of justice. The lat-ter, sitting as a court of impeach-ment, shall, in the presence of the accused party, and of the accuser, if there is one, and of the attorney-general, render by absolute major-ity of votes, the sentence which the law may warrant. a)90, ART. 106. In cases of impeach-ment no pardon can be granted to the offender. ART. 107. The responsibility for official crimes and misdemean-ors can only be enforced during the period in which the function-ary remains in office, and one year thereafter. ART. 108. In civil cases no privi-lege or immunity in favor of any public functionary shall be recog-nized. TITLE V. STATES OF THE FEDERATION. (ART. 109. The States shall adopt for their internal rdgime the popular, representative, republi-can form of government.a) ART. 110. The States shall have the power to fix among themselves, by friendly agreements, their re-spective boundaries; but those agreements shall not be carried into effect without the approval of the Congress of the Union. ARTr. 111. The States can not in any case: I. Enter into alliances, treaties, or coalitions with another State, or with foreign powers. Coalitions between frontier States for offen-sive or defensive war against sav-age Indians are excepted. 11. Grant letters of marque or reprisal. (III. Coin money, issue paper money, or create stamped paper.A) ART. 112. Neither can they, without the consent of the Con-gress of the Union: I. Establish tonnage duties, or any port duty, or impose taxes or duties upon imports or exports. lI. Have at any time permanent troops or vessels of war.111. Make war by itself on any foreign power, except in cases of invasion or of such imminent peril as to admit of no delay. In these cases the State shall give notice immediately to the President of the Republic. ART. 113. Each State is bound to deliver without delay to the au-thority which may claim them, the fugitives from justice of other States. ART. 114. The governors of the States are bound to publish and enforce the Federal laws. ART. 115. In each State of the Federation entire faith and credit shall be given to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of all the other States. The Con-gress may, by means of general laws, prescribe the lnanner of proving said acts, records, and proceedings, and the effect thereof. ART. 116. The Federal Govern-ment is bound to protect the States against all invasion or ex-ternal violence. In case of insur-rection or internal disturbance it shall gi\-e them the same protec tion, provided that the legislature of the State, or the Executive, if the legislature is not in sesion, shall request it. TITLE VI. GENERAL PR()VISIONS. ART. 117. The powers which are not expressly granted by this Constitution to the Federal au-thorities are understood to be re-served to the States. ART. 118. No person shall hold at the same time two Federal elec-tive offices; but if elected to two, he may choose the one which he may prefer. ART. 119. No payment shall be made which is not included in the budget or authorized by a law subsequent to the same.ART. 120. The President of the Republic, the justices of the su-preme court, the members of Con-gress, and all other public officers of the Federation, who are chosen by popular election, shall receive a compensation for their services, which shall be determined by law and paid by the Federal treasury. This compensation can not be waived, and any law which may in-crease or decrease it shall not have effect during the period for which a functionary holds the office. (ART. 121. Every public officer, without any exception, before en-tering on the discharge of his du-ties, shall take an oath to maintain this Constitution and the laws emanating from it.a) ART. 122. In time of peace no military authority shall exercise other functions than those having close connection with military dis-cipline. No fixed and permanent military offices shall be established except in castles, fortresses, and arsenals depending immediately upon the government of the Union, or in camps, barracks, or depots established outside of towns for stationing troops. ART. 123. The Federal authori-ties shall have exclusive power to exercise, in matters of religious worship and external ecclesiastic discipline, the intervention which the laws may authorize. (ART. 124. On and after the first of June, eighteen hundred and fifty-eight, the alcabala taxes, and the interior custom -houses shall be abolished in the whole Republic. b) ART. 125. The forts, barracks, arsenals, and all other edifices nec-essary to the government of the Union shall be under the immedi-ate inspection of the Federal au-thorities. ART. 126. This Constitution, the laws of the Congress of the Unionemanating therefrom, and all the treaties made or to be made by the President of the Republic, with the approval of Congress, shall be the supreme law of the whole Union. The judges of each State shall be guided by said Constitu-tion, laws, and treaties, any pro-vision to the contrary in the con-stitutions or laws of the States notwithstanding. TITLE VII. AMVENDM\ENTS TO THE CONSTITU-TION. ART. 127. The present Consti-tution may be amended. No amendment shall become part of the Constitution, if not agreed upon by the Congress of the Union, by a vote of two-thirds of the members present, and approved by a majority of the legislatures of the States. The Congress of the Union shall count the votes of the legislatures and make the declaration that the amendments have been adopted. TITLE VIII. INVIOLABILITY OF THE COCNSTJ-TUTION. ART. 128. This Constitution shall not lose its force and vigor even if its observance is interrupted by a rebellion. In case that by anypub-lie disturbance a government con-trary to the principles which it sanctions is established, its efficien-cy shall be restored as soon as the people regain their liberty, and those who shall hav-e figured in the government emanating from the rebellion, or have cooperated with it, shall be tried in accordance with its provisions, and the pro-visions of the laws emanating from it.TRANSIENT PROVISION. The present Constitution shall be published at once and sworn to with the greatest solemnity throughout the whole Republic; but its provisions, except those relating to the election of the supreme powers, Federal and State, shall not go into effect until the sixteenth of September next, when the First Congress, under the Constitution, shall meet. On and after that date the President of the Republic and the justices of the supreme court, who shall continue in the exercise of their functions until their successors are constitutionally elected and enter into the discharge of their duties, shall act in strict accord-ance with the provisions of this Constitution. Given at the Hall of sessions of Congress in the City of Mexico on the fifth of February, eighteen hundred and fifty-seven, the thirty-seventh of the Independence.