
His Excellency the President, ad interim, of the Mexican Republic has been pleased to address to me the following decree: The President, ad interim, of the Mexican Republic to the inhabitants thereof, makes ?known, that the Sovereign National Congress has decreed the following Constitutional Laws. In the name of Almighty God, Trinity and Unity, by whom men are destined to form societies and preserve those which they form: the Representatives of the Mexican Nation, delegated by the same to constitute it in the manner which they may deem most conducive to its felicity, being assembled for that purpose in General Congress, have resolved to decree, and do hereby decree, the following Constitutional Laws: LAW I.-Rights and Obligations of Mexicans, and Inhabitants of the Republic. ART. I. Mexicans are: 10. Those born in the territory of the Republic, their father being a Mexican by birth or naturalization. 20. Those born in a foreign country, their father being a Mexican by birth; if when they become their own master, and are established in the Republic, they give notice of their intention to become Mexicans, and actually carry such determination into effect within a year after they have given such notice. 3. Those born in a foreign country, their father being a Mexican by naturalization, who has not forfeited this quality; if they fulfil the condition of the preceding paragraph. 4'. Those born in the territory of the Republic, their father being a foreigner who shall have resided therein until they have become their own master, and shall have then given the notice referred to. 5' . Those not born in the Republic, but who were established therein when the Nation declared its independence, swore obedience to that Act, and have continued to reside here. 6'. Those born in a foreign country, who having lawfully entered the Republic since its Independence, may have obtained letters of naturalization, according to the conditions prescribed by law. II. The rights of Mexicans are: 10. Not to be arrested, unless by the order of a competent judge given in writing and signed, nor to be imprisoned unless by command of the Authorities empowered by Law to do so. The case of persons taken in flagranti is excepted, in which any one may be apprehended; and any one may apprehend any such person, taking him forthwith before the judge or other public Authority. 2'. Not to be detained longer than 3 days, by any Political Authority whatever, without being delivered over at the expiration thereof, with the grounds of his arrest, to the Judicial Authority; nor by the latter Authority longer than 10 days, without an order assigning the motives for his imprisonment. Both the aforesaid Authorities shall be responsible for any abuse they may commit of the foregoing rights. 3' . Not to be deprived of his property, nor of the free use and benefit thereof, wholly or partially. When any object of general and public utility may require the contrary, the dispossession may be effected, provided that the said object be approved of, by the President and his 4 Ministers in the Capital, or by the Government and the Departmental Council in the Departments, and that the owner, whether of an ecclesiastical or a secular corporation, or a private individual, shall have been previously indemnified, on the appraisement of 2 experienced persons, 1 whereof to be named by the party interested, and of an umpire appointed according to law, should there be need of his assistance. The said approval may be questioned by the party interested, before the Supreme Court of Justice in the capital, and before the respective Superior Tribunal in the departments. The objection shall suspend the execution until sentence be pronounced.



4 '. Not to have his house or papers searched, unless in those cases, and with the requisites literally prescribed by the Laws. 5' . Not to be tried or sentenced by a Commission, or by any other Tribunals than those established by the Constitution, nor by other Laws than those decreed previously to the fact under judgment. 6'. Not to be impeded in the removal of his person and property to another country whenever he may please; provided that he leave no engagement of any kind unsatisfied in the Republic, and that he pay on the removal of his property the quota which may be fixed by law. 70• To be at liberty to publish and circulate his political opinions, without their being subject to any previous Censorship. For any abuse of this right, the person guilty of it shall be punished, be he whosoever he may; and both with regard to this, and every other right, the abuse thereof shall be considered as any common offence; but with respect to the penalties, the Judges cannot exceed those imposed by the Laws of the Press, until others have been enacted upon the subject. III. The obligations of Mexicans are: 10. To profess the Religion of their Country, observe the Constitution and the Laws, and obey the Authorities. 2'. To contribute towards the expenses of the State with such sums as may be established by the Laws which include them in their provisions. 30. To defend their country, and give their aid in the support and maintenance of public order, when the Laws, or the Authorities in the name of the Laws, call upon them. IV. Mexicans shall enjoy all other civil rights, and shall be liable to all other obligations of the same nature, which the Laws may hereafter establish. V. The quality of a Mexican is forfeited: 1'. By absenting himself from the Mexican territory longer than 2 years, without applying during that time for a license from the Government. 2'. By remaining in a foreign Country longer than 2 years after the expiration of his license, without having applied for its prolongation. 3*. By enlisting under a foreign banner. 4' . By accepting employment under another Government. 5' . By. accepting honours from another Government, without permission from that of Mexico. 6'. For the crime of high treason against the independence of his country ; for conspiracy against the life of the Supreme Magistrate of the Nation ; for being an incendiary, a poisoner, or an assassin; and for any other crime for which the Laws may impose this penalty.





VI. He who forfeits the quality of a Mexican can obtain the restoration of his rights from the Congress, in the cases and on the conditions which the Laws may establish. VII. Citizens of the Mexican Republic are: 10. All those comprehended in the first 5 paragraphs of Article I, who possess an annual income of at least 100 dollars arising from a fixed or moveable capital, or from any trade or personal exertion, honourable or useful to society. 20. Those who may have obtained special letters of citizenship from the General Congress, with the requisites which may be established by Law. VIII. The rights of a Mexican citizen, besides those described in Article II, and mentioned in Article IV, are: 10. To vote at the nomination of all employments made by direct popular election. 2'. To be eligible for the said employments, provided that he unites in his person the qualifications which the Law may require in each case. IX. The particular obligations of a Mexican citizen are: 1'. To enrol himself on the register of his Municipality. 20. To attend the popular elections, provided he is not prevented by some physical or moral cause. 3'. To fulfil the duties of municipal and popular offices to which he may have been nominated; unless there exists some legal exception or sufficient impediment to prevent his doing so, admitted by the Authority to whom the Law refers the question. X. The particular rights of a citizen are suspended: 10. During his minority. 2'. For his being in the station of a domestic servant. 3' . For a criminal suit, from the date of the order of arrest until the passing of the final sentence. Should such sentence be an acquittal, the party accused shall be considered in the enjoyment of his rights, the same as if no such order of arrest had been issued; so that on that account no sort of prejudice shall result to him. 4'. For not knowing how to read and write, from the year 1846 thenceforward. XI. The rights of a Citizen are forfeited altogether: 10. In those cases in which the quality of a Mexican is forfeited. 2'. By a judicial sentence imposing a degrading penalty. 3'. By fraudulent bankruptcy proved. . 40 By being a proved defaulter in the administration and management of any of the Public Monies. 50. By being a vagrant, of vicious pursuits, or by not following a trade or honest mode of living.





60. By being a Clergyman of the Religion of the State, and consequently unable to fulfil the obligations of a Citizen. XII. Foreigners legally arriving in the Republic, shall enjoy all natural rights, besides those which may be stipulated by Treaty in favour of the subjects of their respective nation; and they are obliged to respect the religion, and to subject themselves to the Laws, of the country, in the cases in which such laws may affect them. XIII. A Foreigner cannot acquire landed property in the Republic, unless he has been naturalized therein, have married a Mexican, and conformed to all the other conditions which the Law relative to such acquisitions may prescribe. Neither can he transport his moveable property to another country, save with the requisites, and paying the quota, which the Laws may direct. The acquisitions of Colonists shall be subject to the special Regulation for Colonization. XIV. The rights of an Inhabitant are acquired, by an uninterrupted residence of 2 years in any town; he stating during that term to the Municipal Authority his intention to reside, and establishing a house, and engaging in some traffic, or useful trade. XV. The rights of an inhabitant are forfeited, by removing to another place, by shutting up his house, and by closing his traffic or business, and setting up in a new abode. Law II.-Organization of the Supreme Conservative Power.
ART. I. There shall be a Supreme Conservative Power, intrusted to 5 individuals; of whom 1 shall be renewed every 2 years, the person to retire being decided by lot in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th periods, the person or persons who may have been named as substitutes not entering into the question. From the 5th period thenceforward the senior member shall retire. II. The lot mentioned in the foregoing Article, shall be drawn by the Senate on the 1st day of August immediately preceding the renewal; and should that body be in recess, the Council of Government shall see it accomplished. III. The ordinary biennial, as well as the ulterior extraordinary Elections, shall take place in the following manner: I'. Each of the Departmental Councils shall elect the number of individuals who are to be nominated for that time. 20. The said elections shall invariably be made by all the Councils on the same day; the ordinary biennial elections on the 1st of October of the year immediately preceding the renewal; the extraordinary elections for the 1st general election of the 5, and of the substitute by vacancy, on the day which the Supreme Executive Power shall fix. . 3 V The extraordinary election, on a vacancy occurring, shall only take place when the said event shall happen more than 6 months




before the periodical renewal; should it not so occur, the election shall be deferred until the 1st of October, when all the vacancies shall be filled up. 40. The election being made by an absolute majority of votes, the Councils shall transmit, in a letter to the Secretary's office of the Chamber of Deputies, a record of election, sealed and certified, by the post immediately following. 50. The omission of the election on the day appointed, and of the transmission of the record thereof, as prescribed by the foregoing paragraph, shall be held to be a case of responsibility against the Departmental Councils, according to what the Law on the matter may determine. 60. On the 15th day of November, immediately previous to the ordinary biennial renewal, and within 40 days after any extraordinary election, the Chamber of Deputies shall open the letters, and forthwith make a list of those who have been nominated; and from such list it shall elect by an absolute majority of voices 3 individuals for each vacancy. 7' . On the day following the election of the 3 or threes, the Chamber of Deputies shall forward the List, together with all the other documents of the election, to the Chamber of Senators; and this body, on the same day, shall elect 1 from each ternary, shall publish the election, and shall communicate the same to the Supreme Executive Power, in order that said Power may apprize the person or persons of their election, to the end that they may enter upon the duties of their office. IV. The individual who has concluded his term may be re-elected; but in such case, he is at liberty to accept or refuse the employment. V. Three substitutes resident in the capital shall be elected, who shall possess all the qualifications which this Law requires for principals, and with the same forms; each ordinary biennial election renewing the said substitutes in totality. VI. The said substitutes shall begin to occupy the place of the principals who cause a vacancy, in the same order in which they were elected; and whilst discharging the duties, they shall enjoy the same salary and the same prerogatives as the said principals. VII. They shall only supply temporary vacancies, or serve until the election to the vacancy is made. VIII. The election to this employment shall be preferred to all others, except the Presidency of the Republic; and it cannot be renounced, either before or after the election, except only on account of physical incapability, recognized by the General Congress. IX. The Members of the Supreme Conservative Power shall take oath before the General Congress, both Chambers being united, under the following formula:




"Do you swear to observe, and cause to be observed, the Constitution of the Republic, maintaining the Constitutional equilibrium between the Social Powers, upholding or re-establishing Constitutional order whenever it may be disturbed, and availing yourself of the power and means which the Constitution places in your hands for that purpose?" After the affirmative answer of the Member elected, the Secretary shall add the ordinary formula: " Should you so act, may God reward you; and if not, may it be required of you." If the Congress should not be assembled, they shall swear provisionally before their own Body; but they shall repeat the oath so soon as the Sittings of the Legislative Body open. X. Each Member of said Supreme Power shall enjoy during his office, the annual salary of 6,000 dollars. His style shall be that of Excellency. XI. To be a Member of the Supreme Conservative Power, it is requisite : 10. To be a Mexican by birth, and in the actual enjoyment of the rights of citizenship. 2'. To be 40 years of age complete on the day of election, and possess a capital (physical or moral) which produces to him an income of at least 3,000 dollars a-year. 3'. To have held one of the following offices: President or Vice-President of the Republic, Senator, Deputy, Secretary of State, or Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice. XII. The attributes of this Supreme Power, are the following: 10. To declare the nullity of a Law or Decree, within 2 months after it has been sanctioned, when it is in manifest opposition to an Article of the Constitution or the Laws, and either the Supreme Executive Power, or the High Court of Justice, or the Members of the Legislative Power, in a representation signed by at least 18 of that Body, shall demand such Declaration. 20. To declare at the instigation of the Legislature, or of the Supreme Court of Justice, the nullity of the Acts of the Executive Power, when in opposition to the Constitution or the Laws; the said Declaration to be made within 4 months, counted from the day on which the said Acts are communicated to the respective Authorities. 30 . To declare, within the same period, the nullity of the Acts of the Supreme Court of Justice, at the instigation of either of the other 2 Powers ; but only in the case of the usurpation of powers. If the Declaration should be in the affirmative, the data shall be sent to the respective Tribunals, in order that, without the necessity of any-other requisite, it may commence legal proceedings, and pass such sentence as the case may demand. 



40. To declare, at the instigation of the General Congress, the physical or moral incapability of the President of the Republic, should such event happen. 5'. To suspend the High Court of Justice, at the instigation of either of the other 2 Supreme Powers, should it disavow either of those Powers, or endeavour to disturb public order. 60. To suspend for the space of 2 months (and no longer) the Sessions of the General Congress, or to resolve upon calling in the substitutes for an equal length of time, when advantageous to the public welfare, and at the instigation of the Supreme Executive Power. 7' . To reinstate constitutionally any of the said 3 Powers, or all 3, when they may have been dissolved by revolution. 80. To declare at the instigation of the Legislative Power, the measure being first proposed by either of the other 2 Powers, what is the wish of the Nation, in any extraordinary case in which it may be desirable to know it. 90 . To declare, at the instigation of a majority of the Departmental Councils, when the President of the Republic is in a situation to renew all the Ministers, for the good of the Nation. 10'. To give or withhold their sanction to the reforms of the Constitution which the Congress may decree; the preliminary steps having been gone through in the manner and according to the forms which the respective Constitutional Laws prescribe. 110. To investigate the elections of Senators. 120. To appoint, on the 1st day of every year, 18 lawyers, chosen from among those having no judicial power ; who are to judge the Ministers of the High Court of Justice, and of the Military Tribunal, in the Cases appointed, and with the constitutional requisites for such cases. XIII. For any resolution of this Supreme Power it is indispensably requisite that there should be an absolute conformity of at least 3 of its members. XIV. Every Declaration that the Supreme Conservative Power shall make, and every resolution that they shall take, which is not specified in Article XII, and even if such Declaration and Resolution should be among those specified, and that they make or take it of their own pleasure, but without the instigation which is respectively required for each in the said Article, is null and of no value. XV. Every Declaration and Resolution of the said Supreme Conservative Power, issued according to the preceding provisions, and particularly quoted, ought to be obeyed instantly, and without reservation, by all persons to whom the said orders are addressed, and their execution belongs. A formal disobedience thereto shall be held to be a crime of high treason. XVI. The members of this Supreme Power, during the term of




their being in office, and for the 2 years immediately following, cannot be elected to the Presidency of the Republic, or obtain any employment that does not fall to them by strict rotation, or be named to any commission; nor can they solicit from the Government any kind of favour for themselves or for others. XVII. This Supreme Power is not responsible for their proceedings, except to God and to public opinion; and the individuals thereof can in no case be judged or called to account for their opinions. XVIII. Should any of them commit any offence, the accusation shall be made before the General Congress, both Chambers united; which body, by an absolute majority of votes, shall decide whether there exist grounds for proceedings being instituted against the accused; and should such be the case, the suit shall be followed up and terminated by the Supreme Court of Justice, after the civil causes in which they may be engaged shall have been tried. XIX. This Supreme Power shall generally reside in the Capital, but in case the public security or their own safety should require their removal to any other place in the Republic, they can resolve and carry into effect such removal for a limited period. XX. On the 1st day of every term of 2 years, the Supreme Conservative Power shall elect from among themselves a President and a Secretary ; re-electing, if they think proper, those who have just filled the said offices. XXI. All the Communications to it from the other Powers shall be addressed to the Secretary. XXII. Every discussion and act of voting of this Power shall be secret, the latter being effected by means of black and white balls. XXIII. Although a proper chamber shall be appropriated to their use in the National Palace, they shall have no fixed days, hours, or place for their Sittings; and the President shall summon them when convenient, by means of Notes addressed to his colleagues, wherein he shall specify the above particulars. LAW III.-Of the Legislative Power, and of everything relating to the formation of the Laws. ART. I. The exercise of the Legislative Power is deposited in the General Congress of the Nation, to be composed of 2 Chambers. Chamber of Deputies. 1I. The basis for the election of Deputies is the Population. There shall be a Deputy elected for every 150,000 inhabitants, and for every fraction of 80,000. The Departments which have not the latter number shall nevertheless elect a Deputy. A number of substitutes equal to that of the members shall also be elected. III. One half of this Chamber shall be renewed every 2 years. 2Y2




The entire number of Departments shall be divided into 2 Sections proportionally equal in population. One Section shall nominate the Deputies of the Department for the 1st term of 2 years, and the other for the following term, and so on in turn. IV. The elections of Deputies shall take place in the Departments on the 1st Sunday in October of the year before the renewal; and the new members shall commence the discharge of their duties in January of the following year. A special Law shall establish the days, mode, and form of these elections, as well as the number and qualifications of the electors. V. The elections of Deputies shall be examined by the Senate; the intervention of this Chamber being limited to their decision, whether or not the qualifications required by this Law are to be found in the individual elected, and whether in the Electoral Councils there was any informality which invalidated the election. In the case of such invalidity in the electoral body, orders shall be issued to have the error corrected; the election shall be repeated, and in the event of the invalidity being in the member himself and not in the substitute, the latter shall be sent up instead of the former. In every case of lasting disqualification in the member the substitute shall be summoned in his stead. VI. To become a Deputy it is requisite: 1° . To be a Mexican by birth, or a native of any part of America, now independent, that in 1810 was subject to Spain, and to have been in the Republic at the time of the Emancipation. 20. To be a Mexican citizen in the actual exercise of his rights, and to have been a native or an inhabitant of the Department which elects him. . 3' To have, on the day of the election, completed 30 years of age. 4' . To possess a capital (physical or moral), which produces to him at least 1,500 dollars annually. VII. The President of the Republic, and the members of the Supreme Conservative Power, while in office, and for 1 year afterwards; the Members of the High Court of Justice, and of the Military Tribunal, the Secretaries of State and the officials of their Department; the Employes of the General Revenue, the Governors of Departments, while in office, and for 6 months afterwards; the Very Reverend the Archbishops and Bishops, Governors of Mitre, Provisors, Vicars General; the Judges, Commissaries and Commandants General of the Departments over which their jurisdiction, employment, or office extends; cannot be elected Deputies. Chamber of $enators. VIII. This Chamber shall be composed of 24 Senators, nominated alter the following manner:

In every case of election, the Chamber of Deputies, the Government in a Council of Ministers, and the High Court of Justice, shall each elect by an absolute majority of votes, a number of individuals equal to that of the new Senators to be elected. The 3 Lists thus made shall be verified by the respective Secretaries, and be then sent to the Departmental Councils. Each of these Councils shall elect from those, and those only, included in the Lists, the proper number of Senators to be appointed, and shall transmit the specificatory List of their election to the Supreme Conservative Power. This Power shall examine them and pronounce upon the election, confining themselves to what Article V prescribes; and they shall declare to be Senators those who may have obtained the majority of the votes of the Councils, in the order of their majority, the lot deciding between those having an equal number. IX. The Senate shall be renewed by a 3rd part every 2 years; the 8 first on the List going out at the end of the 1st term of 2 years, the 8 in the centre, at the end of the 2nd; and the 8 of the longest standing at the end of the 3rd thenceforward. X. The elections which the Chamber of Deputies, the Government, and the Supreme Court of Justice have to make, conformably to Article VIII, must take place precisely on the 3rd of June, of the year immediately preceding the partial renewal. On the 15th of the following August, the Departmental Councils shall make their election; and the investigation and declaration of the Supreme Conservative Power shall be verified on the 1st of October of the same year, and the Executive Government shall immediately communicate to the elected their nomination. XI. The vacancy of a Senator shall be filled up by election made in the manner which Article VIII prescribes; the person elected shall enter upon the vacant place, and shall continue for the time which his predecessor ought to have remained. XII. To be a Senator it is requisite: 10. To be a citizen in the actual exercise of his rights. 20. To be a Mexican by birth. 30. To have, on the day of the election, completed 35 years of age. 4' . To possess a capital (physical or moral) which produces to the individual at least 2,500 dollars annually. XIII. The President of the Republic whilst in office and for 1 year afterwards; the Members of the Supreme Conservative Power; those of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the Military Tribunal; the Secretaries of State, and the Officials of their Departments; the Employes of the General Revenue, and the Governors of Departments, whilst in office, and for 6 months afterwards; cannot be Senators.




Of the Sessions. XIV. The Session of the General Congress shall open on the 1st of January and the 1st of July of every year. That of the 1st period may be closed on the 31st of March; and that of the 2nd shall last until the subjects upon which they are exclusively occupied be concluded. The exclusive object of said 2nd period of session, shall be the examination and approval of the Estimate of the Expenses of the following year, and of the accounts of the Department of Finance relative to the last year but one preceding. XV. The Sittings shall be daily, excepting only the days of ecclesiastical and civil solemnity, which a secondary Law shall point out. XVI. The regulations of the Congress shall specify the hour at which the Sittings are to begin every day, the time which each Sitting ought to last, and all the other preparatory requisites of each ordinary and extraordinary Session, and of the discussions and mode of voting. XVII. At the voting of any Law or Decree, more than the half of the entire number of Members who compose the Chamber must be present; and every question shall be decided by the majority of those who shall be present, except in the cases when the Law requires a greater number. XVIII. For the closing of the Session, as well ordinary as extraordinary, a Decree in due form shall be issued, which shall be passed in both Chambers, and sanctioned and published by the Executive. XIX. Should the Congress not resolve to close the first period of the ordinary Session on the 31st of March, or should the President of the Republic, with the consent of the Council, demand its prolongation, a Decree of prolongation shall be previously issued and published. In the said Decree, the subjects of which alone the Congress shall have to treat during that prolongation shall be specified, but not the time of its duration, which shall be as long as may be necessary, in the months of April, May, and June, for the conclusion of the said subjects. XX. The President of the Republic, with the consent of the Council, and when the Congress is in recess, can have it summoned to an Extraordinary Session by the permanent Deputation, and shall appoint the subjects which they are to discuss, without their being able during such Session to treat of other matters. The permanent Deputation shall have the same power, provided the summons be agreed to by the Executive, which cannot refuse its consent thereto, unless by the advice of the Supreme Conservative Power. XXI. The consideration of the subjects mentioned in Articles XIV, XIX, and XX, shall not impede any other matter which may unexpectedly occur from being treated of, provided that it is very pressing and of general interest, in the opinion of the Executive and of the majority of the 2 Chambers. Neither shall it prevent the accusations, and other matters of business, which have to be laid before the Chambers, from being discussed. XXII. Although the General Congress shall have closed its Session, the Chamber of Senators shall continue to sit when there are any Laws which await their revision. XXIII. When the suspension mentioned in paragraph 6 of Article XII, Law II, upon the Attributes of the Conservative Power, occurs, the Permanent Deputation must summon the Congress to continue their interrupted Sittings at the expiration of the 2 months, and the Congress shall meet for that purpose with or without the summons. XXIV. The President also on such occasions, and with the same requisites as those of the preceding Article, shall increase by substitutes the number of the Chamber of Deputies, for 2 months only at the most. Of the Formation of the Laws. XXV. Every Law must necessarily emanate from the Chamber of Deputies; the revision of it belongs alone to the Senate. XXVI. The initiative of the Laws belongs: 10. To the Supreme Executive Power, and to the Deputies, on all matters. 20. To the Supreme Court of Justice, on matters relative to the Administration of their Department. 30. To the Departmental Councils, on matters relating to imposts, public education, industry, commerce, municipal administration, and constitutional changes. XXVII. The Supreme Executive Power and the High Court of Justice may, each in their sphere, originate Laws. explanatory of other Laws, and the Deputies may originate similar projects when 15 are united to propose them. XXVIII. When the Supreme Executive Power or the Deputies originate Laws, on matters respecting which Article XXVI concedes the right of proposal to the Supreme Court of Justice and Departmental Councils, the respective Opinion of the former and of the majority of the latter shall be heard, before the project of Law is taken into consideration. XXIX. The projects of Law of the Executive and Judicial Powers must be taken into consideration, as also those on which the majority of the Departmental Councils may be agreed upon; all others may be taken into consideration, or not, as the Chamber may resolve, after hearing the report of the Committee of 9 Deputies, all of whom shall be elected every year, and shall be called the Committee of Petitions. XXX. Any private citizen shall be able to entrust his projects of Law, either directly to a Deputy to adopt them, if he likes, or to the corporations of the capitals, which, if they consider them useful,
shall transmit them, with their opinion, to the respective Departmental Council; and if the latter approves of them they shall be proposed as Laws. XXXI. Any project being approved of, in its totality and in each of its Articles, in the Chamber of Deputies, shall be sent to the Senate for revision, with all the documents upon the subject. XXXII. The Chamber of Senators, in the revisal of a project of a Law or Decree, cannot make any alterations or modifications therein, and shall confine itself to the formula of "approved" or "disapproved ;" but, on returning it to the Chamber of Deputies, a circumstantial abstract of the discussion thereon shall be sent to it, in order that the said Chamber may be aware of the parts which have appeared to be faulty, or of the alterations which the Senate may deem proper. XXXIII. If the Chamber of Deputies, two-thirds of the members being present, should insist upon the project of Law or Decree, returned by the Senate, being carried into effect, the latter Chamber, to which it shall be returned for a second revision, cannot disapprove of it without the concurrent vote of two-thirds of the Senators present; if those who disapprove do not reach this number, it shall, in that case, be considered as approved. XXXIV. Every project of Law or Decree, approved of by both Chambers on the first or second revision, shall be forwarded for the sanction of the President of the Republic; and if it be for a Constitutional alteration, for that of the Supreme Conservative Power. XXXV. If the Law or Decree has had only a first discussion in the Chambers, and it should not appear expedient to the President of the Republic, he can return it, within 15 working days, to the Chamber of Deputies, with the observations upon it agreed upon in the Council; this term having expired without his doing so, the Law shall be considered to be sanctioned, and shall be published. XXXVI. If the project of Law or Decree shall have gone through a second revision in the Chambers, and be returned, as in the case of Article XXXIII, the President of the Republic can (he and his Council judging it to be expedient) refuse to sanction the same, without the necessity of making observations; and shall give notice to the Congress of his resolution. XXXVII. The Law or Decree returned, with observations upon it by the President of the Republic, shall undergo a fresh examination in both Chambers; and, if two-thirds of the one and of the other should insist on the passing thereof, it shall be sent a second time to the President, who cannot any longer refuse its sanction and publication; but, if the said requisite be wanting in either of the Chambers, the project shall be held as rejected. XXXVIII. The project of Law or Decree rejected, or not sanctioned, in conformity with Articles XXXIII, XXXVI, and XXXVII,




cannot be again proposed in Congress, nor discussed there, until the Chamber of Deputies be renewed by one-half of its members, as prescribed by Article III. With respect to the alterations of the Constitution which the Supreme Conservative Power shall not sanction, the Chamber of Deputies having been renewed by one-half of the majority of the Departmental Councils shall insist on their being proposed, and two-thirds of the members present of both Chambers shall approve of them, they shall not be again submitted for sanction, but shall be published without it. XXXIX. The Law being sanctioned, the President of the Republic shall cause it to be published in the accustomed manner, in the capital thereof, and in all the capitals of the departments, and towns and places; circulating it for that purpose to the Governors, and through them to the other subaltern Authorities. All these functionaries shall be responsible, if they do not publish the Law within the third day after receiving it. XL. This publication is not requisite for the Decrees, the cognizance of which concerns particular persons or Corporations; but they shall always be published in the Government newspapers. XLI. The formula for publishing the Laws and Decrees shall be the following: " The President of the Mexican Republic to the inhabitants thereof, makes known, that the General Congress has decreed the following [here insert the text]: Wherefore, I order that it be printed, published, and circulated, and that it receive due fulfilment." XLII. The Law being published at any place, comes into force there from the moment of its publication, unless the Law itself fixes an ulterior period for its observance. No prospective Law shall come into force before this requisite. XLIII. Every resolution of the General Congress shall have the character of a Law or Decree. The first named belongs to those which may treat of matters of general interest, within the attributes of the Legislative Power. The second to those within the same orbit, but relating only to particular times, places, corporations, establishments, or persons. XLIV. It exclusively belongs to the General Congress: 10. To dictate the Laws to which the public administration has to conform, in all and each of its branches; and to explain and interpret them, and dispense with their observance. 20 To approve, reject, or reform the legislative dispositions of the Departmental Councils. . 3' To decree annually the expenses for the following year, and the revenues by which they are to be covered. Every tax ceases with the year, in the event of its not having been prolonged to the following year.


 4'. To examine and approve every year the general account of the appropriation of the revenues of the last year but one, which the Minister of Finance presented in the preceding year, and the examination and explanation of which are to be detailed in a second Law. 50. To decree the number of the permanent land and sea forces which there ought to be in the Republic; and every year that of the active militia which there ought to be in the following year; without prejudice to the augmentation or diminution of the same during that period, if the case should require it. 60. To authorize the Executive to contract debts on the credit of the Nation, and to designate the securities for their liquidation. 7'. To recognize the National Debt, and to decree the mode and means of redeeming it. 80. To approve all classes of Treaties which the Executive may negotiate with Foreign Powers, and the Concordats with the Apostolic See. 9. To declare war, approve Treaties of Peace, and prepare regulations for granting Letters of Marque. 10.0 To prepare for the Government general bases and regulations for the opening of all kinds of Ports, the establishment of Custom Houses, and the formation of Commercial Tariffs. 110. To determine the weight, standard, pattern, and denomination of the coin, and to adopt the general system of weights and measures which it may think proper. 120. To grant or refuse the entrance of foreign troops into the Territory of the Republic, and the departure of national troops from the Country. 130. To grant general amnesties, in the cases and in the manner which the Law may prescribe. 140. To create or suppress all kinds of public employments, increase or diminish the salaries thereof, and fix general rules for granting retirements and pensions. 15'. To prepare general rules for the concession of letters of naturalization and citizenship, and to grant the latter in conformity thereto. 160. To increase or diminish by aggregation or division the Departments which form the Republic. XLV. The General Congress cannot: 10. Dictate a Law or Decree, without the proposals, intervals, revisions, and other requisites enacted by this Law, and pointed out by the regulations of Congress; those expressed in the said regulations being the only exceptions to this Law. 20. Proscribe any Mexican, or impose any penalty, direct or indirect. It belongs only to the Law to designate generally the punishments for offences.



30*. Deprive any person of his property, directly or indirectly, whether of an individual or an ecclesiastical or secular body. It only belongs to the Law, in this particular, to establish generally contributions or taxes. 4' . Pass any Law, which is not purely declaratory, of a retrospective effect, or which applies, directly or indirectly, to cases previous to its publication. 5' . Deprive, or even suspend, Mexicans from their rights, declared in the Constitutional Laws. 60. Assume to itself, or delegate to others, by way of extraordinary faculties, 2 or the 3 powers, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. XLVI. Any Law or Decree prepared in express contravention of the preceding Article is null.

0

Faculties of the Chambers, and Prerogatives of their Members.

XLVII. No criminal accusation for common offences can be brought against the President of the Republic, from the day of his appointment until a year after his Presidency has expired; nor against the Senators, from the day of their election until 2 months after their office is terminated; nor against the members of the High Court of Justice and Military Tribunal, the Secretaries of State, the Councillors, and the Governors of Departments; except before the Chamber of Deputies. If the accused should be a Deputy, within the period of his deputation or 2 months afterwards, or should the Congress be in recess, the accusation shall be made before the Senate. XLVIII. For official offences, during the period fixed in the preceding Article, of the President of the Republic, for those of the Secretaries of State, the Magistrates of the High Court of Justice, and Military Tribunal, the Councillors, the Governors of Departments, and the Departmental Councils; for any transgression of Article III, paragraph 5, of the 2nd Constitutional Law, of Article III of the 4th Law, and of Article XV of the 6th Law, in its 3 first parts; the Chamber of Deputies, before which the accusation must be made, shall declare whether or not there exist grounds for the same: should the declaration be in the affirmative, they shall appoint 2 of their members to support the accusation in the Senate. The latter proceedings being instituted, and the accusers and defenders having been heard, the Senate shall pass sentence, without its being able to impose any other penalty than that of destitution of the office or employment held by the accused, or of his perpetual or temporary disqualification from obtaining any other; but if, in the opinion of the Senate, it should result from the proceedings that he be deserving of heavier punishment, the cause shall be sent to the respective Tribunal, in order that it may be instituted according to Law. XLIX. For common offences, the accusation being made, the




respective Chambers shall declare, whether or not there exist grounds for proceeding: should the declaration be in the affirmative, the criminal shall be placed at the disposal of the competent Tribunal for trial. The affirmative resolution shall only require the confirmation of the other Chamber, should the accused be the President of the Republic. L. The affirmative declaration, as well for official as for common offences, suspends the accused from the exercise of his functions, and the rights of a citizen. All the other requisites of these judgments and 'restrictions, relative to the accuser, the accused, and the mode of proceeding, shall be specified in the Regulations of Congress. LI. Either of the Chambers can, without the intervention of the other : 10. Pass resolutions, not governmental, relative to the locality of their Sittings, the better arrangement of their Department, and the Offices annexed, the number, appointment, and salary of their Officers, and to everything relative to the regulation of the Chambers, which is purely internal. 2'. Communicate with each other, and with the Government, by writing, or by means of Deputations chosen from among themselves. LII. It exclusively belongs to the Chamber of Deputies, besides what has been specified in this Law: 1'. To watch over, by means of an Inspecting Committee, composed of 5 individuals from its body, the exact fulfilment of their duties by the Officers of the General Accountant's Office and of the General Offices of the Revenue. A 2nd Law shall detail the mode and terms in which the Inspecting Committee shall discharge their duty, according to the attributes which may be assigned to them therein. 20. To nominate the Chiefs and the other Officers of the General Accountant's Office. 3' . To confirm the appointments which the Government shall make of the Chiefs of the General Offices of the Revenue, established or to be established. LIII. It exclusively belongs to the Chamber of Senators: 1'. To give their consent to be issued, or to withhold, the Conciliary Decrees, Bulls, and Pontifical Edicts, containing general provisions of importance to the Nation. 20. To take cognizance, during the recess of the General Congress, of the accusations mentioned in Article XLVII; and to give or withhold in cases of emergency the permission mentioned in the 12th paragraph of Article XLIV, when summoned for that purpose by the permanent Deputation. 3'. To approve the nominations which the Executive Power may make, of Diplomatic Envoys and Consuls, and of Colonels, and other high Officers of the permanent army, navy, and active militia.





LIV. The salary of the Senators shall be higher than that of the Deputies, and the quotas of both shall be fixed by a supplementary Law. LV. The Deputies and Senators shall be inviolable for their opinions expressed in the discharge of their duties, and at no time and by no Authority shall they be blamed or molested on account of them. LVI. The Deputies and Senators, in addition to what the Regulations of the Congress prohibit them from doing, cannot: 10. Renounce their employment, without showing good, just, and proper cause, sanctioned by their respective Chamber. 20. Accept for themselves, or solicit for others, during the time of their employment, and for a year afterwards, any commission or employment of emolument from the Government, nor even any step, except that which may be their right by regular rotation. 3'. Obtain for themselves, or solicit for others, during the time specified in the above paragraph, any pension or honour from the Government. Of the Permanent Deputation. LVII. The Permanent Deputation shall be composed of 4 Deputies and 3 Senators, which, at the end of the 1st ordinary Session of each term of 2 years, shall be nominated by their respective Chambers. ILVIII. To this Deputation it belongs: 10. To summon the Congress to an Extraordinary Session when the President of the Republic shall so determine, or the Deputation shall think it necessary, conformably to Article XXI. 2'. To summon the Congress to continue its ordinary Session, when interrupted, as mentioned in Article XXIII. 3' . To summon the Senate to a particular Session, in the cases and for the objects stated in the 2nd paragraph of Article LIII. 4'. To grant or withhold their permission to the Members of the Congress to absent themselves from the capital, the Chambers being in recess. 50. To watch over, during such recess, the infractions of the Constitution.
Law IV. Organization of the Supreme Executive Power.

I. The exercise of the Executive Power is deposited in a Supreme Magistrate, who shall be denominated President of the Republic. He shall continue in office for 8 years, and be elected in the following manner: II. On the 16th day of August of the year preceding the renovation, the President of the Republic, in conjunction with the Council and Ministers, the Senate and the High Court of Justice, shall each select 3 individuals, and on the same day they shall transmit the lists of the same directly to the Chamber of Deputies.


This Body, on the day following, shall select 3 individuals from those specified in the said lists, and shall forward the list of the 3 so selected to the Departmental Councils. These Councils shall elect an individual out of the 3 contained in the list which they have received, the election taking place on the 15th day of October of the year anterior to the renovation; and they shall transmit an attested proof of the record of election by the next post to the office of the Secretary of the Chamber of Deputies; the omission of complying with the provisions of this paragraph being considered a case of responsibility against the Departmental Councils. On the 15th day of the following December, the 2 Chambers shall meet for the purpose of opening the records which they may have received; they shall name a Special Commission of 5 individuals to examine them, to pronounce upon the elections (solely with reference to their validity or nullity), to arrange the votes, and present the suitable Report. The said Report being discussed and approved of in the united General Congress, the person shall be declared to be the President who shall have obtained the greatest number of votes; and, in case of an equality, the person whom the lot shall determine; the lot and everything relating thereto taking place in the same Sitting. III. The records specified in the preceding Article shall be null if executed on any other days than those assigned therein; and solely in the event of any social revolution rendering the meeting of Congress, or of the majority of the Departmental Councils impossible, the Congress, with the consent of 2-3rds of the Members present of each Chamber, shall designate other days; such resolution being considered as extraordinary, and for that once only. IV. A Decree declaratory of the election shall be issued, which shall be solemnly published by the Government, and shall be communicated to the party concerned, in order that he may present himself to take the oath, and be put in possession, on the 2nd of the following January. V. The President who has finished his term can be re-elected; provided that he be proposed in the 3 lists mentioned in the 1st paragraph of Article II; that he be selected as 1 of the 3 chosen by the Chamber of Deputies mentioned in paragraph 2 of the same Article, and that he obtain the votes of 3-4ths of the Departmental Councils. VI. The Office of President of the Republic cannot be declined, except in the case of re-election, and even then only on account of just grounds, and subject to the confirmation of the General Congress. VII. If the individual elected be absent, the Congress, taking the distance into consideration, shall appoint the day on which he is to present himself.





VIII. The President of the Council shall govern during the temporary absence of the President of the Republic. He shall also take the Government upon himself, during the interval which may occur between the period of the cessation of the late and the presentation of the new President. IX. The duties of the President of the Republic terminate on the 1st of January of the year of the renovation. X. In case of the vacancy, by death or legal destitution, of the President of the Republic, the ,elections shall go forward in the same manner as that stated in Article II, the Congress designating by Special Decree the day on which each is to take place. If the death or destitution should happen in the last year of his Office, the elections mentioned in the following Article shall take place, and the person elected shall discharge the duties until possession be taken by the President, who shall be elected in the time and manner designated in Article II of this Law. XI. In every case of vacancy, and whilst the election and possession of the President in proprietary right, whether elected ordinarily or extraordinarily, takes place, a President, ad interim, shall be nominated in the following manner: The Chamber of Deputies shall elect 3 individuals, possessing all the qualifications required by this Law for that employment, and shall transmit the said list of 3 to the Senate. The latter Chamber on the following day shall elect from the said list, the individual who is to act as President, ad interim, and shall give notice of the same to the Chamber of Deputies; and the Decree of Nomination shall be communicated to the Government for publication, as well as to the party concerned, the day on which he is to present himself to be sworn in being appointed at the same time. XII. The proprietary President, or the President ad interim, in order to take possession of his office, shall, in presence of the General Congress, the 2 Chambers being assembled together, make oath according to the following formula: "I, N., named President of the Mexican Republic, swear by God and the Holy Gospels that I will observe and cause to be observed with exactitude the Constitution and Laws of the Nation." The internal regulations of the Congress shall detail all the ceremonies of this act. XIII. When incapacity, physical or moral, shall befall the President, the invitation spoken of in paragraph 4 of Article XII of the 2nd Constitutional Law, shall be voted by 2-3rds of the Members present of the Chamber of Deputies, and confirmed by the absolute majority of the individuals composing the Senate. XIV. In order to be elected President of the Republic it is requisite:


 
10. To be a Mexican born, and in the actual exercise of the rights of a Citizen. 20. To be 40 years of age complete on the day of Election. 3'. To be in possession of a capital, physical or moral, producing to the individual the annual sum of 4,000 dollars. 4'. To have held one of the Superior Offices, civil or military. 5'. To have not been condemned by legal process for any crime, or malversation with regard to public property. 6'. To be resident within the Republic at the time of Election. XV. The prerogatives of the President of the Republic are: 1'. To give or refuse his sanction to the Laws and Decrees of the General Congress, in the Cases not excepted in the 3rd Constitutional Law. 20. To submit to the General Congress, Projects of Law or Decrees, upon all points on which he is empowered to make them, and which it cannot decline to take into consideration. 3'. That he cannot be criminally accused during his Presidency, and for a year afterwards, of any kind of crime committed before or during his tenure of that Office, except in the terms prescribed in Articles XLVII and XLVIII of the 3rd Constitutional Law. 40. That he cannot be criminally accused of political offences, committed before or during his Presidency, after the expiration of a year from the cessation of his functions. 50. That he cannot be proceeded against, without the previous declaration of both Chambers, prescribed in the last paragraph of Article XLIX of the 3rd Constitutional Law. 60. To appoint freely the Secretaries of State, and to have the power always of removing them, as he may judge expedient. 7'. To select and send to the Chambers, Orators to explain and support the opinions of the Government, in all cases the importance of which makes this measure advisable, in his opinion and that of his Council. XVI. He who acts as President ad interim, or as the President's substitute, shall enjoy the same prerogatives. In this case, however, the term allowed for the enjoyment of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th Prerogatives, shall only extend to 2 months, subsequently to the termination of their functions. XVII. The attributes of the President of the Republic are: 10. To issue, in accordance with the General Laws respectively, all Decrees and Orders for the better administration of Public Affairs, the observance of the Constitution and Laws, and, in concert with the Council, the Regulations for the fulfilment of them. 20. To originate all the Laws and Decrees which he may, in concert with the Council, deem expedient for the good government of the Nation.



30 To make, in concert with the Council, such observations as he may think fit, upon the Laws and Decrees communicated to him by the Congress for promulgation, provided it be not in the cases excepted in the 3rd Constitutional Law. 4' To publish, circulate, and cause to be observed the Constitution, Laws, and Decrees of the Congress. 5' To resolve, in concert with the Council, the propositions spoken of in Paragraphs 1 and 6 of Article XII of the 2nd Constitutional Law. 6' To demand of the Congress the prorogation of their ordinary Session. 70 To resolve that the Permanent Deputation convoke the Congress to extraordinary Sessions, and to point out, in concert with the Council, the matters therein to be discussed. 8' To negative, in concert with the Supreme Conservative Power, the convocation made by the Permanent Deputation, for which power is given to it by Article XX, 2nd part, of the 3rd Constitutional Law. 90 To see that the Contributions are duly levied, and to direct their application in accordance with the Laws. 100 To name the Members of the Council, in the terms prescribed by this Law. 11' To name the Governors of the Departments, out of a list of 3, furnished by the Departmental Council, and in concert with the Council. 120 To remove Diplomatic Functionaries, whenever he may deem it expedient. 130 To appoint Diplomatic Functionaries and Consuls, and the Colonels and other superior Officers of the Standing Army, and of the Navy, and active Militia, and the principal Officers of the higher Departments of Finance at present established, or to be established; subject, with regard to the first, to the approbation of the Senate, and to the last to that of the Chamber of Deputies, as is prescribed in Articles LII and LIII of the 3rd Constitutional Law. 140 To nominate to all the other military employments and public offices, under the conditions prescribed by the Laws. 15' To have a voice in the nomination of the Judges and Individuals employed in the Tribunals of Justice, conformably with the regulations of the 5th Constitutional Law. 160 To grant Retirements, Leave of Absence, and Pensions, agreeably to the Laws. 170 To have the disposal of the armed Force, naval and military, for internal security and external defence. 18' To declare War in the name of the Nation, with the previous consent of the Congress; and to grant Letters of Marque, conformably with the Laws,



19' To conclude Concordats with the Apostolic See, conformably with the bases given by the Congress. 20' To direct diplomatic Negotiations, and to conclude Treaties of peace, amity, alliance, truce, and armed neutrality, submitting them to the approbation of the Congress previous to ratification. 210 To receive Ministers and other Foreign Envoys. 220 To urge the Ministers of Justice to a prompt administration of it, and to afford them all necessary aid towards carrying their sentences and judicial decisions into effect. 23' To suspend for the space of 3 months, and even to deprive of the half of their pay, for the same period, Functionaries named by him who have been guilty of infractions of his orders and decrees; and, in the case wherein he may deem it expedient to proceed against them legally, he shall submit to the proper Tribunal the facts of the case. 240 To sanction or suspend the execution of the decrees of Councils, Pontifical Bulls, Briefs, and Rescripts, with the consent of the Senate, if they contain general provisions; consulting the Supreme Court of Justice if they turn on points of a controversial nature; and the Council, if they relate to private affairs, or to such as are purely administrative. In every case of suspension of such nature, he shall address to the Supreme Pontiff, within 2 months at furthest, an explanation of the motives thereof, in order that his Holiness, thus informed, may take the steps which may seem good to him. 25' To nominate, after the ratification of a Concordat with the Apostolic See, and in accordance with what shall be therein agreed upon, to all Bishoprics, Ecclesiastical Dignities, and Benefices in the patronage of the nation, with the consent of the Council. 260 To grant or refuse, in concert with the Council, and in conformity with the Laws, pardons which may be applied for, having first heard the Tribunal in whose decision the sentence shall have originated, and the Supreme Court of Justice; the execution of the sentence being suspended during their deliberations. 270 To take care that legal exactitude be observed in the coinage of Money. 280 To provide for all that may conduce to the good government of the Departments. 29' To contract Debts on the National Credit, with the previous authorization of the Congress. 30' To open Ports or close them; to establish or suppress Custom Houses; to frame the Tariffs of Commerce, in strict conformity with the bases previously fixed by the Congress. 310 To grant, in concert with the Council, Letters of Naturalization, under the regulations prescribed by Law. 320 To grant Passports to Mexicans for the purpose of going to Foreign countries, and to extend the term of their leave of absence.



 330 To grant or refuse to Foreigners entrance into the Republic, and to expel therefrom those not naturalized who may render themselves objects of suspicion. 340 To grant, in concert with the Council, exclusive Privileges, upon the terms established by Law. XVIII. The President of the Republic cannot: 1' Command in person the Naval or Military Forces, without the consent of the General Congress, or, during its recess, that of the Senate, by the vote of 2-3rds of the Senators present. During his command of the Forces, all his participation in the Government shall cease, and he shall remain subject to the Government as a General. 20 Deprive any one of his liberty, nor, of his own act, impose any penalty. Nevertheless, when the public good and security require it, he shall have power to arrest those who are objects of suspicion, but he must place them at the disposal of the competent Tribunal or Judge within 3 days at farthest. 30 Take possession of the property of any individual or corporate body, except in the case and under the provisions detailed in Paragraph 3 of Article II of the 1st Constitutional Law. 40 Leave the Territory of the Republic during his Presidency, nor for a year afterwards, without the permission of Congress. 50 Alienate, cede, or give in exchange, any City, Town, Place, or part of the National Territory. 60 Surrender or alienate national Property, without the consent of Congress. 7' Impose, directly or indirectly, any kind of Contributions, general or special. 8' Cause to be executed the acts prohibited in Paragraphs 4, 5, 6, and 7 of Article II of the 1st Constitutional Law, and in Paragraph 5 of Article XLV of the 3rd Law. 90 Stop or put off the Elections established by the Constitutional Laws. 100 Prevent or disturb the Sittings of the Conservative Power, or prohibit the execution of its Resolutions. XIX. Every act contrary to the foregoing Article is null, and renders responsible the Secretary of that Department which authorizes it. XX. The secondary Laws shall assign the Salary with which this Supreme Magistrate shall be indemnified, and all the ceremonials which shall be observed with regard to him. Of the Council of Government. XXI. This Council shall be composed of 13 Councillors, of whom 2 shall be Ecclesiastics, 2 Military, and the rest of the other classes of society; and they shall be elected in the following manner. 




The Congress for the time being shall draw up a List of 39 individuals, and shall present it to the President of the Republic, who, the next day, shall select from it and name the 13 Councillors. In every case of vacancy occurring hereafter, the Senate shall propose a list of 3 to the President of the Republic, in order that he may elect a successor to the vacant place. XXII. The election of the 13 Councillors spoken of in the foregoing Article having taken place, the President of the Republic shall send a list of them to the Congress, who, on the same day, shall name the 1 out of them who shall preside over the Council, and the 1 who is to supply his place when absent. This election hereafter shall be made by the Chamber of Deputies every 2 years, on the 10th day of January, and shall be communicated to the President of the Republic, in order that he may publish it. The President, whose office has just ceased, may be re-elected. XXIII. The office of Councillor shall be perpetual, and cannot be resigned but for just cause, recognized as such by the President of the Republic, and with the assent of the same Council. XXIV. To be a Councillor it is necessary to be a Mexican born, and to possess the same qualifications as are required for Deputies by Article VI of the 3rd Constitutional Law. XXV. The Duties and Privileges of the Council are 1' To exercise all those expressed in this Law, and in the other Constitutional Laws. 20 To give the Government their opinion, in all cases and on all subjects on which it is required of them. 30 To name from among their Members the one who shall fill the office of Secretary, and that of his substitute when he shall be absent. This Election shall take place on the 10th day of January every 2 years, and those who go out of office may be re-elected. XXVI. The Members of the Council shall be responsible only for the opinions they give contrary to express Law; each individually, if it be a case of Constitutional Law, or of bribery or subornation. Their responsibility cannot be made effective, except in the manner and in the terms prescribed in the 3rd Constitutional Law. XXVII. A secondary Law shall regulate in detail all the functions of the Council, the manner of executing them, and the whole of its internal government, and shall assign the Salaries to be given to its Functionaries. Of the Ministry. XXVIII. For the dispatch of the affairs of Government there shall be 4 Ministers: 1 of the Interior, 1 of Foreign Affairs, 1 of Finance, and 1 of War and Marine. XXIX. The Ministers shall be chosen exclusively by the President of the Republic, and shall be Mexicans by birth, citizens in the actual



exercise of their rights, and who have not been condemned by legal process for crimes, or for malversation in regard to public property. XXX. Every important affair of Government shall be determined by the President of the Republic in Council with the Ministers, who shall sign their determination in a book kept for that purpose, specifying him or them who dissent. XXXI. To each Minister it belongs: 10. To administer all the affairs belonging to his Department, having previously agreed thereupon with the President of the Republic. 20. To authorize, by his signature, all the Regulations, Decrees, and Orders of the President to which he agrees, and which relate to matters belonging to his Department. 3' . To present to both Chambers a Report, specifying the condition of the various branches of public administration belonging to his Department. This Report shall be presented by the Minister of Finance in July of every year; and by the 3 others in January. XXXII. Each Minister shall be responsible for the non-execution of the Laws whose fulfilment belongs to his Department; and for the acts of the President which he may authorize by his signature, and which are contrary to the Laws, particularly those of the Constitution. The responsibility of the Ministers can only be made effective in the manner and in the terms prescribed in the 3rd Constitutional Law. XXXIII. The Government shall draw up Regulations for the better execution of the Secretary Departments, and shall present them to the Congress for its approbation. XXXIV. The salaries of the Ministers shall be regulated by a secondary Law, they retaining, in the interim, such as have been hitherto enjoyed by them.

Law V.-

Of the Judicial Power of the M11exican Republic.

ART. I. The judicial power of the Republic shall be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, by the Superior Tribunals of the Departments, by those of the Finance Department which shall be established by a special Law, and by the Courts of First Instance. II. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be composed of 11 Judges and a Fiscal. II. It represents the judicial power, in everything appertaining to it, and in those duties which cannot be discharged by the entire Body: it has to take care that the Tribunals and the Courts of the Departments are duly filled by the Magistrates and Judges who should compose them, and that full and prompt justice be rendered therein. IV. In order to be elected a Member of the Supreme Court, it is necessary:




be a Mexican by birth. be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. be 40 years of age, complete. have not been condemned for any crime by legal process. be a Lawyer, and to have been at least 10 years in the

exercise of that profession. The qualification of a Mexican by birth is not necessary: first, for the sons of a native Mexican, who, happening to have been born out of the Republic, shall have established themselves in it subsequently to becoming legally their own masters; secondly, for those who may have been born in any of those parts of America which previously to 1810 belonged to Spain, and have separated from her, provided always, that they resided in the Republic before the establishment of its independence; thirdly, for those who, being natives of a Province which once formed part of the Republic, may have been theretofore settled in it. V. The election of the Members of the Supreme Court, in the case of future vacancies, shall take place in the same manner and exact form as that of the President of the Republic. VI. The election being decided, the Decree declaring it shall be drawn up on the same day, and shall be published by the Government, and communicated to the Tribunal and to the person elected, in order that the latter may present himself to be sworn in and take possession. VII. The newly-elected Member shall take the oath before the Chamber of Deputies; during its recess, before the Senate; and, during the recess of both, before the permanent Committee. Its form shall be: "Do you swear to God our Lord to keep and cause to be kept the Constitutional Laws, to administer justice well and completely, and duly to discharge all the functions of your office ? If you do thus, may God reward you; and if not, may he require it of you." VIII. If a Deputy, Senator, or Councillor be elected a Minister or Fiscal of the Supreme Court of Justice, the latter election shall supersede the former. IX. The Members of the Supreme Court of Justice shall not be tried in civil and criminal causes concerning themselves, except in the manner and before the Tribunals established in the 2nd and 3rd Constitutional Laws. X. Every 2 years, and within the first 6 days of January, the President of the Republic, in conjunction with the Council and Ministers, the Senate and the High Court of Justice, shall each draw up a list of 9 individuals, resident in the capital, and possessing the same qualifications as are required for Members of the said Supreme Court, in order that, as substitutes, they may supply the place of absent Magistrates. XI. These lists shall be immediately forwarded to the Chamber




of Deputies, which shall name from among the individuals comprised therein the 9 who shall discharge the duties of substitutes. XII. It is the province of the Supreme Court of Justice: 10. To take cognizance of civil and criminal causes instituted against the Members of the Supreme Conservative Power, in the terms and with the provisions laid down in Article XVIII of the 2nd Constitutional Law. 20. To take cognizance of criminal causes instituted against the President of the Republic, the Deputies and Senators, Secretaries of State, Councillors, and Governors of Departments, under the provisions laid down in the 3rd Constitutional Law. . 30 To take cognizance, in the first instance, of civil causes in which, whether as plaintiffs or defendants, the President of the Republic and the Secretaries of State are concerned, and in those in which Deputies, Senators, and Councillors are defendants. 40. To take cognizance, in the third instance, of causes brought against Governors and Chief Magistrates of Departments, and in the same instance in criminal causes instituted against them for common delinquencies. 5'. To decide questions of disputed competency which may arise between the Tribunals of different Departments, or Special Courts. 60. To take cognizance of judicial disputes which may arise regarding contracts or negotiations, concluded by the Supreme Government, or by its express order. 7'. To take cognizance of causes involving the responsibility of the Magistrates of the Superior Departmental Tribunals. 8'. To take cognizance, in all instances, of criminal causes concerning the Diplomatic Functionaries and Consuls of the Republic, and of the civil actions in which they are defendants. 9'. To take cognizance of Admiralty cases, of prizes taken by sea and on land, of crimes committed on the high seas, and of offences against the Mexican Nation, according to the terms to be prescribed by a Law. 100. To take cognizance of criminal actions which may be brought against those Functionaries who are immediately subordinate to the same Supreme Court, for omissions, transgressions, or abuses of the duties of their appointments. 110. To take cognizance of appeals of nullity which may be interposed against sentences pronounced, in the last instance, by the Superior Tribunals of 3rd Instance of the Departments. 120. To take cognizance of appeals for protection and redress interposed by the Very Reverend the Archbishops and the Reverend Bishops of the Republic. 13'. To originate Laws relative to the administration of justice, according to the provisions of the 3rd Constitutional Law, and more




particularly those which have for their object the regulation of alt the Tribunals of the Nation. 140. To deliver their opinions upon all Laws originated by the Supreme Government, or by the Deputies in the same branch of the administration of justice. 15'. To entertain the doubts presented by the other Tribunals and Courts upon the interpretation of any Law, and, finding them to be well founded, to forward them to the Chamber of Deputies, pronouncing their opinion, and soliciting a declaration in conformity therewith. 160. To name all the subordinate officers and dependents of the said Supreme Court. 17'. To name the Ministers and Fiscals of the Superior Departmental Courts, according to the following form: The Superior Departmental Tribunals shall make lists of all candidates for the said offices, and of those who in their opinion are duly qualified for them; they will then forward the Lists to the Governor of the Department, who, assisted by the Council of the same, shall be at liberty to exclude those candidates whom he may judge to be unworthy of the public confidence of the Department, and, having so done, he shall return the Lists to the said Tribunals. They shall then make another list, comprising those who still remain eligible after the exclusion, and describing, successively and circumstantially, the aptitude and merits of each. This list being forwarded to the Supreme Government, the latter may, in concert with the Council, reject those who in their judgment do not merit the good opinion and confidence of the Nation; and having lastly forwarded it to the Supreme Court of Justice, the said Supreme Court shall proceed to nominate the candidates from amongst those against whom no objection shall have been made. 180. To confirm the appointment of the Permanent Judges of the 1st Instance, made by the Superior Departmental Tribunals. 190. To support or oppose petitions for pardon, made in favour of delinquents. 200. To take cognizance of all matters of controversy appertaining to the ecclesiastical patronage belonging to the Nation. 210. To have a voice in the expediting or suspension of Pontifical Bulls, Briefs, or Rescripts, issued in matters in litigation. 22'. To hear and decide upon the appeals interposed in the capital of the Republic, respecting the qualification offered for the taking possession of the property of Strangers, in the cases treated of in paragraph 3 of Article II of the 1st Constitutional Law. XIII. The Supreme Court of Justice, in associating with itself General Officers, shall constitute itself a Court Martial, for the purpose of taking cognizance of all matters and causes of special military jurisdiction, in the terms which shall be provided for by a Law, on the following bases:



10. In criminal cases which are purely military, military members only shall decide in this Court Martial. 20. In civil matters, civilians only shall take cognizance and decide. . 30 In criminal cases of a common and mixed nature, both shall take cognizance conjointly, as well as in those instituted against Commandant-Generals for offences committed by them in the exercise of their jurisdiction. XIV. In this Court-Martial there shall be 7 purely military members and 1 Fiscal, with 4 substitutes for the former, and 1 for the latter. The election of all of them shall take place in the same manner as that of the Ministers of the Supreme Court of Justice, and they shall in the same manner enjoy the privileges specified in Article IX. Their qualifications shall be the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th prescribed in Article IV of this Law, it being also understood that they be Generals of Division or of Brigade. XV. The necessary conditions of being employed by their Government in matters of service, shall be the same as those required by Article XVI of this Law, 4th restriction, in order to enable the members of the Supreme Court of Justice to hold any commission. XVI. The restrictions upon the Supreme Court of Justice and its members are as follow : 1'. It shall not have the power to make of itself any regulation, not even in matters belonging to the administration of justice, nor to introduce any measures containing general dispositions which may alter or interpret the Laws. 2'. It shall not have the power to take any cognizance whatever of national matters of a Governmental or administrative nature. 30. It shall not have the power to take any cognizance in matters of dispute pending in the Departmental Courts, or which appertain to the jurisdiction of their respective Territories. 40. No Minister or Fiscal of the Supreme Court shall be permitted to hold any Government commission. When the Government, for special reasons which affect the public good, shall deem it expedient to nominate any such Magistrate as a Secretary of State, or to a Diplomatic Mission, or other office of the kind, it shall have power to do so in concert with the Council and with the consent of the Senate. 5'. The Ministers and Fiscals of the Supreme Court shall not be permitted to be Advocates or Attorneys in lawsuits, or Assessors, nor Arbiters of right, or Arbitrators. XVII. The Supreme Court of Justice shall frame regulations for their internal Government and the discharge of all their duties ; they shall proceed immediately to put them in execution, and shall forward them to the Congress for its correction or approval.



 Of the Superior Tribunals of the Departments. XVIII. In every capital of a Department there shall be established a superior Tribunal, organized in the manner to be prescribed by a Law. XIX. The powers of all these Tribunals shall be equal, and they shall be independent of each other in the execution of their functions. XX. To be elected a Minister of the said Tribunals it is requisite: 10. To be a Mexican born, or to be in one or other of the categories expressed in paragraph 2 of Article IV of this Law. 20. To be a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights. 3'. To have completed 30 years of age. 4'. To have not been condemned by legal process for any crime. 5' . To be a lawyer, and to have actually exercised that profession during at least 6 years. XXI. The Chief Judges and Fiscals of the Tribunals, on taking possession of their offices, shall take the oath prescribed in Article VII before the Governor and Council of the Department. XXII. The functions of these Tribunals are as follow: 1'. To take cognizance, in the 2nd and 3rd Instance, of the civil and criminal causes belonging to their respective Territories, and, in the 1st and 2nd Instance, of the civil suits of the Governors of those Departments whose capitals are the nearest to them, and in the civil and criminal causes of their Superior Magistrates. 20. To take cognizance, in the 1st and 2nd Instance, of ordinary criminal causes, and those of responsibility and civil matters in which the Inferior Judges of their Territory are Defendants. In the same Instances also of those which are brought against their own officers and immediate dependents, for omissions, abuses, or transgressions committed in the discharge of their duties; and, in the 3rd Instance, of the affairs which arise, or suits which are instituted in the like cases, in those Departments whose capital is the nearest to them. 30. To take cognizance of appeals of nullity from sentences given by Judges of the 1st Instance in written judgments, and, when the appeal has been disallowed, to oral sentences which involve immediate execution. 4'. To decide questions of competency of jurisdiction which arise among their Inferior Judges. 5'. To take cognizance of appeals for protection and redress, made by the Ecclesiastical Judges of their Territories, provided they be not Archbishops and Bishops. 60. To declare, in the cases of criminals who have claimed the right of sanctuary, those cases in which the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be called upon to deliver them up. 70. To determine the qualifications of the Lawyers nominated to fill up the vacancies which occur in the same Tribunals; performing this duty strictly in conjunction with the Governors and respective




Departmental Councils, in the manner prescribed in paragraph 17 of Article XII of this Law. 8'. To name the Judges of 1st Instance of their Territories upon the previous intervention of the Governors and Councils of the respective Departments. This intervention shall take place in the mode laid down in the said paragraph 17 of Article XII of this Law; notice being immediately given to the Supreme Court, in order to the confirmation of the appointment made by the Tribunal. 9'. To name their inferior Functionaries and Dependents respectively. XXIII. The restrictions of these Tribunals and of their Ministers are the following: 10. They shall not have the power of making any Regulations, not even on matters concerning the administration of justice, nor to introduce measures containing general dispositions which may alter or interpret those of the Laws. 20. They shall not have the power to take any cognizance of the Governmental or administrative matters of their Departments. XXIV. No Minister or Fiscal of these Courts shall be permitted to act as Advocate or Attorney in lawsuits, Assessor or Arbiter of right, or Arbitrator, nor to hold any Government commission in his respective Territory. Of the Inferior Judges of the First Instance. XXV. In the chief district towns of each Department there shall be established Inferior Judges, with their corresponding Courts, for the hearing of civil and criminal causes in the 1st Instance. There shall likewise be the same in the chief places of cantons (cabeceras de partido) to be designated by the Departmental Councils, in concert with the Governors, provided that the population of the whole Canton be not under 20,000 souls. XXVI. To be a Judge of the 1st Instance it is requisite: 10. To be a Mexican born, or to be in one or other of the categories expressed in paragraph 2 of Article IV of this Law. 20. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 3'. To have not been condemned for any crime by legal process. 4'. To be 26 years of age complete. 5' . To be a Lawyer, and to have exercised that profession at least 4 years. XXVII. The Judges of the 1st Instance may not act as Advocates or Attorneys in lawsuits, nor as Arbiters of right, or Arbitrators. XXVIII. They shall limit themselves solely to the cognizance of judicial matters. XXIX. In these matters the Alcaldes of the townships shall exercise such powers as the Laws may establish.




General Provisions, relative to the Administration of Justice in Civil and Criminal Matters. XXX. There shall be no other Special Courts but the Ecclesiastical and Military. XXXI. The Ministers and Fiscals of the Supreme Court shall hold their offices for life, and may not be suspended or removed, except in accordance with the provisions of the 2nd and 3rd Constitutional Laws. XXXII. In like manner, the Ministers of the Superior Tribunals of the Departments and the professional Judges of the 1st Instance shall be permanent, and shall not be removed, except for offences legally proved, and by a sentence pronounced thereupon. XXXIII. All the Magistrates and Judges shall enjoy the salary which shall be assigned to them by a Law. XXXIV. In every cause, whatever be its importance or nature, there shall be no more than 3 Instances. A Law shall fix the number of Instances which every cause may go through, in order that its execution be absolute, according to its nature, speciality, and circumstances. XXXV. The Ministers who shall have pronounced judgment in any one Instance, shall not have the power to do so in any other Instance. XXXVI. Any misconduct by collusion, bribery, or fraud, is ground of action on the part of the public against the Magistrates or Judges who commit it. XXXVII. Any failure in the observance of the essential forms regulating a suit, renders it null in Civil Causes, and entails personal responsibility on the Judges. A Law shall fix the steps which, as essential, must not be omitted in any Cause. XXXVIII. In criminal Causes such omission is ground of responsibility to the Judge who commits it. XXXIX. All litigants have the right of terminating at any time their civil suits, or their criminal suits in cases of injury purely personal, through the medium of arbitrating Judges, whose sentences shall be executed according to the Laws. XL. In order to institute any civil suit, or any criminal suit in cases of injury purely personal, the conciliatory mode must first be tried. The Law shall regulate the form to be observed in such proceedings, the cases in which it shall not take place, and whatever else relates to this matter. XLI. The written warrant signed by the Judge which must precede caption, according to paragraph 1 of Article II of the first Constitutional Law, shall be shown to the individual concerned when arrested; he and all are to obey, fulfil, and aid in the execution such warrants, and all resistance or attempt to obstruct or elude them are grave misdemeanours, and punishable according to the circumstances. XLII. In case of resistance or of well-grounded apprehension of escape, force may be resorted to. XLIII. To proceed to caption it is requisite: 1st. That a summary


 
information should precede it, from which it shall be proved that an act has taken place, deserving, according to the laws, of being visited with corporal punishment. 2nd. That it be proved, likewise, that some reason or sufficient presumption exists for believing that the accused committed the criminal act. XLIV. To proceed to simple detention, it is sufficient that there exist some legal presumption or ground of suspicion in the view of the Judge against the party, and for a determinate offence. A Law shall establish the penalties necessary for restraining the arbitrary exercise of the Judge's power in such matters. XLV. No prisoner shall suffer any detention of his property, except where his arrest shall have arisen from an offence involving his pecuniary responsibility, and then only to the amount necessary for covering the said responsibility. XLVI. When, in the course of the suit, and by the particular evidence produced, it shall appear that the accused is not liable to corporal punishment, he shall be set at liberty, under the conditions and circumstances to be determined by a Law. XLVII. Within 3 days after the imprisonment or detention, the preparatory declaration of the accused shall be taken. In this act the cause of the proceeding and the name of the accuser, if there be one, shall be included; and this declaration, as well as the others which may be presented in the cause, shall be received without oath on the part of the accused, so far as respects his own acts. XLVIII. At the time of the declaration of the accused, and of the charge being made against him, he shall be made acquainted with the documents, witnesses, and other evidence to be brought against him, and from the time of the accomplishment of this, the proceedings shall continue without any reserve towards the accused. XLIX. Torture shall never be resorted to for the verification of any description of offence. L. The penalty of confiscation of property shall not be imposed. LI. Every punishment, as well as every offence, is entirely personal to the delinquent, and shall never extend to his family. Law VI.-Division of the Territory of the Republic; and internal Government of its Townships. I. The Republic shall be divided into Departments, conformably with the 8th of the Organic Bases. The Departments shall be divided into Districts, and the Districts into Cantons (Partidos). II. The 1st Constitutional Congress, in the months of April, May, and June, of the 2nd year of their Session, shall make the division of the Territory into Departments, by a Law which shall be constitutional. III. The Departmental Councils, during the remainder of that


year, shall make the division of their several Departments into Districts, and the division of districts into Cantons, reporting the same to the Government, and the latter communicating the said information to the Congress for its approbation. Whilst the divisions treated of in the 2 preceding Articles are in progress, the Territory of the Republic shall be provisionally divided by a secondary Law. IV. The internal Government of the Departments shall be vested in the Governors, subject to the control of the General Government. V. The Governors shall be selected by the General Government from 3 individuals proposed by the Departmental Councils; but without this obligation in the case of the frontier Departments, and with power to reject, for once, all of the 3 individuals proposed in the case of the other Departments. The Governors shall continue for 8 years, with the power of being re-elected. VI. In order to be a Governor it is required: 10. To be a Mexican by birth, or to have been born in some part of America which, previous to 1810, was a dependency of Spain, and has since separated itself from that Country; provided always that the individual resided in the Republic at the time of its becoming independent. 20.. To be a citizen in the enjoyment of the rights of citizenship. 3' To be a native or inhabitant of the Department. 4'. To be full 30 years of age. 50 . To possess a real or professional capital, producing at least an annual income of 2,000 dollars. 60. To be of the secular class. VII. It appertains to the Governors: 10. To provide for the preservation of public order within the Department. 20. To dispose of the armed force granted by Law for that purpose. 30. To observe, and cause to be observed, the Decrees and Orders of the General Government; and the resolutions of the Departmental Council, which shall have received the approbation of the Congress, in the cases wherein it is so required by Law. 4' . To forward to the Government, together with his Report, all the resolutions of the Departmental Council. 56. To appoint the Prefects, and approve of the appointment of the Sub-Prefects of the Department. To confirm that of the Justices of the Peace, and to remove any of these functionaries, having previously heard the opinion of the Departmental Council touching such removal. 6'. To name the civil servants of the Department, whose appointment is not reserved to some other Authority. . 7 To suspend for as long as 3 months, and to deprive even of half their salary, for the same period, the civil servants of the Department. 8 To suspend the Municipalities of the Department, with the




consent of the Departmental Council. In the case of their making use of either of the 2 preceding attributes, they shall immediately report the same to the General Government, in order that it may, according to its powers, determine whatever may be thought expedient with regard to the suspension. 90. To resolve the doubts which may occur respecting elections of Municipalities, and accept or not the resignation of members of the same. 100. To exercise, in concert with the Departmental Council, with a casting voice in case of equality of votes, the power of rejection mentioned in Article XII, paragraph 17, and Article XXII, paragraph 8, of the 5th Constitutional Law. 110. To enjoin the Tribunals and Judges to administer justice with the greatest promptitude and impartiality, reporting to the respective Superior the irregularities of the inferior Authorities. 12'. To watch over the Revenue Offices of the Department, in the manner to be hereafter provided for by Law. VIII. In cases of temporary vacancy there shall be appointed a Governor ad interim, in the same manner as the permanent Governor is appointed, and with the like qualifications. If the vacancy be of short duration, the senior member of the Departmental Council, not being an Ecclesiastic, shall take charge of the Government; the same being observed during the interval which may elapse from the time of the vacancy occurring in the Government until the appointment of the Governor ad interim. IX. In each Department there shall be a Council called the Departmental Council, composed of 7 members. X. These shall be chosen by the same electors who name the Deputies for the Congress, the election taking place the day immediately following that of the election of the Deputies. There shall also be elected 7 supplementary members, in the same manner as the permanent members are elected. XI. The Departmental Council shall be renewed in full every 4 years, and commence its functions on the 1st day of January. XII. The election of these Councils shall take place on the close of the preceding elections, with the approbation of the Governor, but subject to the ulterior decision of the Senate, to which body a report thereof shall be immediately made, without prejudice, however, to the duties of those elected. XIII. In order to be a member of the Departmental Council, the same qualifications are required as for a Deputy. XIV. The Departmental Councils are authorized: 10. To propose Laws relating to taxes, public education, industry, commerce, municipal administration, and modifications of the Constitution, in conformity with Article XXVI of the 3rd Constitutional Law.





20. To draw up the opinions mentioned in Article XXVIII of the same Law. 30. To establish Elementary Schools in all the towns of their respective Department, endowing them with ample funds from the Municipal Revenues, where there are such, or by imposing moderate contributions where there are none. 4'. To regulate the opening and repair of the interior roads of the Department, establishing moderate tolls to defray their expenses. 5' . To introduce all regulations conducive to the maintenance and improvement of public schools and charitable institutions, and such as may tend to promote agriculture, industry, and commerce; but if the adoption of them should in any manner oppress the inhabitants of the Department, they shall not be put into execution without the previous consent of Congress. 60. To promote, through the medium of the Governor, every thing that may tend to the prosperity of the Department in all its branches, and to the welfare of its population. 7'. To frame, in conjunction with the Governor, the Municipal Regulations of the Corporations, and those corresponding to the internal police of the Department. These Regulations, and the rules given in conformity with paragraphs 3 and 4, as also the Regulations which, according to paragraph 5, do not require to be previously approved of, may be put immediately in force, subject always to what Congress shall afterwards ordain. 8'. To examine and approve the Accounts to be rendered of the receipts and expenditures of money arising from Municipal Revenues. 90. To consult the Government in all cases in which the latter may require such consultation. 100. To call upon the Supreme Conservative Power to declare when the President of the Republic shall be required to reconstruct the Ministry, as a measure beneficial to the Nation. 110. To elect the President of the Republic, the Members of the Supreme Conservative Power, the Senators, and the Members of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the Court Martial, agreeably to the various provisions of the respective Constitutional Laws. 120. To propose to the General Government 3 individuals for the appointment of Governor. 130. To exercise, jointly with the latter, the right of rejection referred to in Articles XII and XXII of the 5th Constitutional Law, as regards the appointment of magistrates and judges. 14'. To arrange and forward annually to the General Government the statistical accounts of the Department, with such remarks as may be deemed expedient for the advantage and improvement of the Department. XV. Restrictions upon Governors and Departmental Councils. 10. They shall impose no contributions, either under pretence of




Municipal or any other Dues, except in the terms expressed in this Law; nor shall they apply them to other purposes than such as are herein declared. 20. They shall take no measures for levying an armed force, except when expressly empowered so to do by the Laws, or in such cases as the General Government may direct. 3'. They shall make use of no other privileges but those granted by this Law; and any infraction of this, or of the 2 former paragraphs of this Article, shall be visited with the most severe responsibility. 4° . No individual of the Departmental Councils shall be allowed to resign his duties, except for legal reasons, to be sanctioned by the Council, with the consent of the Governor. XVI. In every chief city of a district there shall be a Prefect named by the Governor, and confirmed by the General Government; his time of office shall be for 4 years, and he can be re-elected. XVII. In order to be a Prefect, it is required: 10. That he be a Mexican citizen, in the full enjoyment of his rights in that condition. 20. That he be a native or resident of the Department. 30 That he be upwards of 30 years of age. 4' . That he possess a physical or moral capital producing him at least 1,000 dollars per annum. XVIII. It appertains to the Prefect: 1'. To protect public order and maintain tranquillity within his district, with entire submission to the Governor. 20. To observe and cause to be observed, the orders of the Government of his own Department. 3'. To watch over the duties of the Municipalities, and generally over all that relates to the police. XIX. In every chief town of a District, there shall be a Sub-prefect, named by the Prefect, with the approbation of the Governor: he shall act for 2 years, and may be re-elected. XX. In order to be a Sub-prefect, it is required: 10. To be a Mexican citizen, in the full enjoyment of his rights as such. 20. To be a resident of the town. 3'. To be upwards of 25 years of age. 4' . To possess a physical or moral capital that shall produce him at least 500 dollars a-year. XXI. The duties of a Sub-prefect of a Town are the same as those of the Prefect of a district, being subordinate to him, and through him to the Governor. XXII. There shall be Municipalities in the capitals of Departments; in all the places in which they existed in 1808; in the sea-ports, provided their population exceeds 4,000 souls; and in all towns comprising




8,000 souls. In towns of inferior population, there shall be Justices of the Peace, entrusted also with the police, and in such numbers as shall be designated by the Departmental Councils, conjointly with the respective Governors. XXIII. The Municipalities shall be elected by the people, on the terms to be provided for by a special Law. The number of Alcaldes, Municipal Officers, and Recorders shall be fixed by the respective Departmental Councils, conjointly with the Governor. The number of the first shall not exceed 6, that of the second, 12, and of the last, 2. XXIV. In order to be a Member of the Municipality, it is required: 10. To be a Mexican citizen, in the full enjoyment of his rights of Citizenship. 20. To be a resident of the same town. 30 To be upwards of 25 years of age. 4'. To possess a physical or moral capital that shall produce him at least 500 dollars per annum. XXV. It appertains to the Municipalities to promote the salubrity and convenience of the public, to look after the prisons, hospitals, and charitable institutions which have no peculiar endowments; to watch over the grammar schools which are supported from the public funds; to attend to the construction and repair of bridges and roads, and to the receipt and expenditure of all Municipal Revenues; to promote the improvement of agriculture, industry, and commerce, and aid the Alcaldes towards the maintenance of public tranquillity in their neighbourhood, with entire regard to the Laws and other regulations. XXVI. The Alcaldes shall exercise in their towns the office of Conciliators: they shall decide in cases of verbal suits; take the most effectual measures, in cases of contention which do not allow time for application to the corresponding judge; direct, under similar circumstances, the first steps in criminal matters; enforce the orders sent to them by the tribunals or corresponding judges, and watch over tranquillity and public order, subject in this respect to the Sub-prefects, and through them to the superior Authorities. XXVII. The Justices of the Peace, who are also charged with the police, shall be proposed by the Sub-prefect, be nominated by the Prefect, and approved of by the Governor. They shall act for one year, and may be re-elected. XXVIII. In order to be a Justice of the Peace, it is required: 1*. To be a Mexican citizen, in the full enjoyment of his rights as such. 20. To be a resident of the town. . 30 To be upwards of 25 years of age. XX IX. The Justices of the Peace shall exercise in their own towns the same rights and privileges as are already laid down for the Alcaldes,





and those given to the Municipalities, subject in the latter to the SubPrefects, and through them to their respective superior Authorities. In places where the population is less than 1000, the functions of Justices of the Peace shall be limited to keep public order, to attend to the police of the place, and to decide in civil and criminal cases, which, from their urgency, do not afford time for application to the respective neighbouring Authorities. XXX. The offices of Sub-Prefects, Alcaldes, and Justices of the Peace who are entrusted with the police, and the Municipal Officers and Recorders shall have no salaries attached. They cannot be resigned without a legal cause, such cause to be approved of by the Governor, or in the cases of re-election. XXXI. A secondary Law shall fix all that relates to the exercise of the duties of Prefect, Sub-Prefect, Justice of the Peace, Alealde, Municipal Officer, and Recorder; the manner of providing for the vacancies; the indemnification to be given to the Governors, Members of the Departmental Councils, and Prefects ; and the immunities which other Officers shall enjoy.
Law VII.-Alteration of the Constitutional Laws. I. During the 6 years which shall follow the publication of this Constitution, no amendment shall be made in any of its Articles. II. In proposing Amendments after that term, it shall be indispensable to observe the forms required by Article XII, paragraph 10, of the 2nd Constitutional Law; by Article XXVI, paragraphs I and 3, and Articles XXVIII, XXIX, and XXXVIII of the 3rd Constitutional Law; and by Article XVII, paragraph 2, of the 4th Law. III. In the Bills proposing any amendment, as in those for other Laws, the Chamber of Deputies may not only alter the wording, but also add and modify, in order to make the Project perfect. IV. The Projects of Amendments, in the cases referred to in Article XXXVIII of the 3rd Constitutional Law, shall be subject to what that Article provides. V. It belongs only to the Constitutional Congress to resolve any doubts upon the Articles of the Constitution. VI. Every public functionary, on entering upon the duties of his office, shall swear to observe the Constitutional Laws, and to cause them to be observed; and he shall be responsible for the infractions which he may commit, or shall not prevent.

Temporary Articles. I. The day following that appointed for the election of Deputies, the election for the Departmental Councils shall take place. These elections, where there is no retiring Council, shall be verified by the Municipality of the Capital, subject to what may be determined by the Senate.

 
II. The Congress shall name the days of election referred to in Article VIII of the 3rd Constitutional Law, and in Article II of the 4th Law; and the Government shall also appoint the day for the election referred to in Article III, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the 2nd Constitutional Law. III. A Commission of 19 members named by a majority of votes in Congress, shall discharge for the first time the electoral duties which should solely devolve on the Chamber of Deputies, according to Article III, paragraph 6, of the 2nd Constitutional Law, and Article VIII, paragraph 1, of the 3rd Law; and also those functions which, by the 4th Law, and by Articles V, X, XI, and XIV of the 5th Constitutional Law, should belong only to the Senate. IV. The Congress in a body shall discharge the electoral functions, which by Article III, paragraph 6, of the 2nd Constitutional Law, belong only to the Senate ; those which belong to the Supreme Conservative Power by Article VIII, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 3rd Law; and those which appertain solely to the Chamber of Deputies, according to Article II of the 4th, and Articles V, X, XI, and XIV of the 5th Constitutional Law. V. The nomination referred to in Article XII, paragraph 12, of the 2nd Constitutional Law, shall be made for the first time by the Supreme Conservative Power, within a month from the period of its installation ; and on the day of this installation, the election of President and Secretary, which are prescribed by Article XX of the 2nd Constitutional Law, shall take place. VI. The 1st Constitutional Congress shall meet on the day named in the Decree of Convocation, and shall close the first period of its Session on the 30th June, 1837. VII. In the organization of the Superior Tribunals of the Departments, the rights of the present Magistrates shall be respected for this time only, in the terms of a Law to be passed for that purpose; which same Law shall also determine the manner in which they are to be elected, keeping as much as possible within the limits of the Constitution. VIII. The periods of service fixed by the Constitutional Laws for all Functionaries about to be elected according to the present provisions, shall be taken to commence from the 1st of January, 1837, whatever may be the day on which they begin to exercise their functions. Mexico, 29th December, 1836. ATENOGENOS CASTILLERO, Representative for the Department of Puebla, President. Tiso VEJO, Representative of the Department of San Luis Potosi, Vice-President. [Here follow the signatures of the Representatives of the Departments of California; Chiapas ; Chihuahua ; Coahuila and Tejas ; Durango; Guanajuato; Mexico; Michoacan; Oajaca; Puebla; Queretaro; San Luis Potosi; Sonora; Sinaloa; Tabasco; Tamaulipas; Vera Cruz; Yatisco; Yucatan; and Zacatecas.] Representatives of the Departments of Yucatan, Chiapas, Nuevo Leon, and Oajaca, Secretaries. RAFAEL DE MONTALVO, MANUEL LARRAINZAR, BERNARDO GUIMBARDA, Luris MORALES E IBANEZ DE CORBERA, Wherefore let it be printed, published, circulated, and carried into effect. Palace of the National Government, Mexico, 30th December, 1836. JOSE JUSTO CORRO. To JOSE MARIA ORTIZ MONASTERIO.
I communicate the same for your guidance, and for its punctual fulfilment.

God and liberty.

Mexico, December 30, 1836. JOSE MARIA ORTIZ MONASTERIO.
