UNIVERSITY CF HAWAII LIBRARY

THE

NEW ZEALAND CONSTITUTION ACT;
TOGETHER WITH

COEEESPONDENCE
BETWEEN T H E

SECEETABY OF STATE FOE THE COLONIES
AND THE

GOVEENOE-IN-CHIEF OF NEW ZEALAND

IN

EXPLANATION

THEEEOF.

NEW ZEALAND:
BY AUTHOEITY: GEOEGE DIDSBUBY, GOVEENMENT P E I N T E B , WELLINGTON.

CONTENTS.
Page

1. Preface 2. Despatch from Sir George Grey to the Eight Honourable Earl Grey, 9th July, 1849 3. Despatch from Sir George Grey to the Eight Honourable Earl Grey, 30th August, 1851 4. New Zealand Constitution Act .. 5. Despatch from Sir J. Pakington to Sir George Grey, 16th July, 1852.. 0. Extract from Earl Grey's Despatch, February, 1852 7. Extract from Earl Grey's Despatch, August, 1850 8. Proclamation, 17th January, 1853 9. Proclamation, 28th February, 1853 10. Proclamation, 5th March, 1853 11. Proclamation, 4th March, 1853

5

17 41 68 75 78 79 80 83 104

THE

NEW ZEALAND CONSTITUTION ACT.
(Passed tho 30th day of Juno, 1852.)
IN THE FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH YEAKS OF TUE IlEIGN OF IIEIÎ MAJESTY QUEEN VICTORIA.

Title. Preamble. 3 & 4 Viet., c. 02; 9 & 10 Vict., c. 1C3 ; 11 & 12 Vict., c. 5. 1. Repeal oí recited Acts, &c. Provisoes. 2. Certain provinces established iu New Zealand. 3. Each province to havo a Superintendent and Provincial Council. i. Before olection of members of Provincial Councils Superintendents of provinces to be chosen. 5. Governor may appoint electoral districts, &c. G. Qualification of members. 7. Qualification of voters. 8. Aliens and persons convicted of certain offences disqualified. 9. Members may resign their scats. 10. In certain cases seats to becomo void. 11. Determination of questions as to vacancies. 12. Issue of writs for supplying vacancies. 13. Duration of Provincial Council. Dissolution. II. When writs are to issue. 15. Convening of Council. 18. Prorogation. 17. A session to be hold every year. 18. Superintendent and Provincial Council may make laws. 19. Restrictions on powers of legislation. 20. As to election of Speaker. 21. Speaker to preside. 22. Quorum. 23. Questions to bo determined by majority of yotes. 24. Standing orders to bo adopted. 25. Appropriation and issue of money. 2G. Superintendent may transmit drafts of laws for consideration of Council. 27. Gifing or withholding assent to Bills.

28. Superintendent to send copies of Bills assented to to Governor. 29. Disallowance of Bills assented to. 30. No Bill to have any force until assented to by Governor. 31. Governor may transmit instructions to Superintendent as to reserving Bills. 32. Establishment of a General Assembly. 33. Appointment of members of tho Legislative Council. 34. Legislative Councillors may hold scats for life. 35. Resignation of scat in Council. 3G. Causes by which seat may bo vacated. 37. Trial of question whether scats aro vacated. 38. Appointment of Speaker of Legislative Council. 39. Quorum, &c. 40. Tower to summon a House of Eepresentatives by Proclamation in Her Majesty's name. 41. Tower to Governor by Proclamation to constitute electoral districts, &c., for election of members of Houso of Eepresentatives. 42. Qualification of voters for members of Houso of Eepresentatives. 43. First writs to bo issued within six months. 44. Time and place of holding tho General Assembly. Trorogation and dissolution. 45. Disputed elections. 4G. No member to sit or vote until ho has taken the oath of allegiance. 47. Affirmation or declaration instead of oath. 48. Speaker to be elected on first meeting of Houso of Eepresentatives. 49. Resignation of scats. 50. Vacating of scats in certain cases. 51. Election to toko rtfaco on vacancies.

3*

42

THE NEW ZEALAND tho provisions concerning election of members, &c. 70. Her Majesty may establish Municipal Corporations. 71. Her Majesty may cause laws of aboriginal native inhabitants to be maintained. 72. Tower to General Assembly to regulate sales of waste lands. 73. Saving as to tho lands of aboriginal native tribes. 74. 10 and 11 Vict., c. 112. Upon all sales of wasto lands, onefourth part of the sum to bo paid to New Zealand Company till their debt is discharged. Tower to New Zealand Company to release lands from payments, &c. 75. Saving as to Canterbury Settlement lands. 13 & 14 Vict., c. 70, and 14 and 15 Vict., c. 84. 7G. Power to Canterbury Association to transfer their powers to tho Provincial Council. 77. Saving as to Nelson Trust Fund. 14 & 15 Vict., c. 8G. 78. Tower to Her Majesty to regulate tho disposal of waste lands in Otago. No Act of the General Assembly to interfere with such regulations, save with consent, &c. 79. Her Majesty may delegate certain powors to Governor. 80. Interpretation of " Governor " and " New Zealand." 81. Commencement of this Act. 82. Troclamations to be published in tho Neio .Zealand Gazette. Schedule.

52. Standing rules and orders to bo made 53. Power of General Assembly to make laws. 54. As to tho appropriation and issue of money. 55. Governor may transmit drafts of laws to either House. 50. Governor may assent to, refuse assent, or reserve Bills, 57. Governor to conform to instructions transmitted by Her Majesty. 58. As to disallowance by Her Majesty of Bills assented to by t h e Governor. 59. No reserved Bill to have any force until assented to by Her Majesty. GO. Acts to be printed. 01. Duties not to be levied on supplies for troops, nor any dues, &c,inconsistent with treaties. 02. Expenses of collection of revenue. G3. Audit of accounts. G4. Grants for civil and judicial services. G5. How t h e appropriation of sums granted may bo varied. 0G. Appropriation of revenue. 67. Tower to General Assembly to alter electoral districts, and number of members of House of Eepresontatives, &c. G8. Tower to General Assembly to mako other alterations in the constitution of the House of Representatives. G9. Tower to General Assembly to constitute provinces, and alter

Title. Preamble. 3 & 4 Vict., c. 62.

AN ACT to grant a Bepresentativc Constitution to the Colony of New Zealand. WHEREAS by an Act of the session holden in the third and fourth years of Her Majesty, chapter sixty-two, it was enacted that it should be lawful for Her Majesty, by letters patent, to be from time to time issued under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, to erect into a separate colony or colonies any Islands which then were, or which thereafter might be, comprised within and be dependencies of the Colony of New South Wales : And whereas, in pursuance of the powers in Her vested by the said Act, Her Majesty did, by certain letters patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, bearing date the sixteenth day of November, in the fourth year of Her reign, erect into a separate colony the Islands of New Zealand, theretofore comprised within or dependencies of the Colony of New South Wales, bounded as therein described ; and the said Islands of New Zealand were thereby erected into a separate colony accordingly : and

CONSTITUTION ACT.

43

Her Majesty did, by the said letters patent, authorise the Governor for the time being of the said Colony of New Zealand, and certain other persons, to be a Legislative Council for such colony, and to make laws for the peace, order, and good government thereof : And whereas, by an Act of the session holden in the ninth and tenth years of 9 & 10 vict. Her Majesty, chapter one hundred and three, the Act c ' l o a firstly herein recited, and all charters, letters patent, instructions, and Orders in Council, made and issued in pursuance thereof, were repealed, abrogated, and annulled, so far as the same were repugnant to the Act now in recital, or any letters patent, charters, Orders in Council, or Eoyal Instructions to be issued under the authority thereof ; and, by the Act now in recital, certain powers for the Government of the said Islands were vested in Her Majesty, to be executed by letters patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, or by instructions under Her Majesty's signet and sign manual, approved in Her Privy Council, and accompanying or referred to in such letters patent : And whereas, in pursuance of the said last-11 & 12 vict mentioned Act, Her Majesty did, by letters patent, c-5bearing date at Westminster the twenty-third day of December, in the tenth year of Her reign, and by certain instructions made and approved as required by such Act, and bearing even date with and accompanying the said letters patent, execute certain of the powers by such Act vested in Her Majesty for the better government of the said Islands : And whereas by an Act of the session holden in the eleventh and twelfth years of Her Majesty, chapter five, so much of the said Act secondly herein recited, and the said letters patent and instructions issued in pursuance thereof, as relates to the constitution and establishment of two or more separate Assemblies within the said Islands, and of a General Assembly in and for the said Islands, was suspended for five years, unless Her Majesty, with the advice of Her Privy Council, should direct the same to be carried into effect before the expiration of that period; and, by the Act now in recital, the said firstly-recited Act, letters patent, and instructions were revived for the time during which the said secondly-recited Act, letters patent, and instructions were suspended as aforesaid; and, by the Act now in recital, certain powers were vested respectively in tho Governor-in-Chief of the said Islands, and in such Governor and the Legislative Council thereof: And whereas it is expedient that further and better provision should be made for the Government of New Zealand :

44

THE NEW ZEALAND

Be it therefore enacted, by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :— 1. The said Acts, and all charters, letters patent, inRepeal of recited Acts, structions, and Orders in Council issued in pursuance &c. thereof, shall be, and the same are hereby repealed, so far as the same are repugnant to, or would prevent or interfere with, the operation of this Act, or any letters patent or instructions to be issued under the authority or in pursuance of this Act : Provided, nevertheless, that Provisoes. all laws and ordinances made, and acts done, under and in pursuance of the said recited Acts, and any charters, letters patent, instructions, or Orders in Council issued in pursuance thereof, shall continue as lawful, valid, and effectual as if this Act had not been passed, save so far as any such laws, ordinances, or Acts may be repugnant to, or would prevent or interfere with, the operation of this Act : Provided also that, until the expiration of the time, or latest of the times, appointed for the return of writs for the first election of members of the Provincial Councils of the provinces established by this Act, the existing Provincial Legislative Councils shall continue to have and exorcise all rights, jurisdiction, powers, and authorities which they would have had if this Act had not been passed ; and, until tho expiration of the time appointed for the return of tho writs for tho first election of the members of tho House of Eepresentatives to be constituted under this Act, tho Legislative Council of New Zealand shall continue to have and exercise all rights, jurisdiction, powers, and authorities which such Legislative Council would havo had if this Act had not been passed. 2. The following provinces are hereby established in Certain provinces New Zealand—namely : Auckland, New Plymouth, Welestablished in New Zealand. lington, Nelson, Canterbury, and Otago ; and the limits of such several provinces shall bo fixed by Proclamation by the Governor as soon as conveniently may be after the Proclamation of this Act in New Zealand. Each provinco 3. For each of the said provinces hereby established, to have a Superintendent and for every province hereafter to be established, as nnd Provincial hereinafter provided, there shall be a Superintendent and Council. a Provincial Council ; and the Provincial Council of each of tho said provinces hereby established shall consist of such number of members,' not less than nine, as the Governor shall by Proclamation direct and appoint.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

45

4. Upon or before the issue of writs for the first Before election election of members of the Provincial Council for any Fiorina™°f province established by or under this Act, the persons councils suduly qualified in each of the said provinces to elect ^provinces3 members for the Provincial Councils as hereinafter t0 be chosen, mentioned, shall elect a Superintendent of such province : and on the termination of such Council, by expiration of the period hereinafter fixed for its continuance, or by the previous dissolution thereof, the persons qualified as aforesaid shall elect the same or some other person to be Superintendent, and so on from time to time; and every such Superintendent shall hold his office until the election of his successor : Provided always that it shall be lawful for the Governor of New Zealand, on behalf of Her Majesty, to disallow any such election; and if such disallowance be signified by the Governor, under the seal of New Zealand, to the Speaker of such Council, at any time within three months after such election, the office of Superintendent shall become vacant ; and, on any vacancy occasioned by such dis, allowance, or by the death or resignation of the Superintendent (such resignation being accepted by the Governor on behalf of Her Majesty), a new election shall in like manner take place : Provided, further, that at any time during the continuance of the office of any such Superintendent it shall bo lawful for Her Majesty to remove him from such office on receiving an address signed by the majority of the members of such Provincial Council praying for such removal ; and thereupon the like proceedings shall be had as in the ease of any such vacancy as above mentioned. 5. It shall be lawful for tho Governor, by Proclama- Governor may tion, to constitute within each of the said provinces torïï'âlaWcts, hereby established convenient electoral districts for the Reelection of members of the Provincial Council, and of the Superintendent, and to appoint and declare tho number of members to be elected for each such district for the Provincial Council, and to make provision for the registration and revision of lists of all persons qualified to vote at the elections to be holden within such districts, and for the appointing of Eeturning Officers, and for issuing, executing, and returning the necessary writs for such elections, and for taking the poll thereat, and for determining the validity of all disputed returns, and otherwise for insuring the orderly, effective, and impartial conduct of such elections; and in determining the number and extent of such electoral districts, and

46

THE NEW ZEALAND

Qualification of members,

Qualification of voters.

Aliens and
P r

the number of members to be elected for each district, regard shall be had to the number of electors within the same, so that the number of members to be assigned to any one district may bear to the whole number of the members of the said Council, as nearly as may be, the same proportion as the number of electors within such district shall bear to the whole number of electors within the limits of the province. 6. Every person within any province hereby established, or hereafter to be established, who shall be legally qualified as an elector, and duly registered as such, shall be qualified to be elected a member of the Provincial Council thereof, or to be elected Superintendent thereof : Provided always that it shall not be necessary that he reside or possess the qualification in the particular district for which he may be elected to serve as a member. 7. The members of every such Council shall be chosen by the votes of the inhabitants of the province who may be qualified as hereinafter mentioned ; that is to say, every man of the age of twenty-one years or upwards, having a freehold estate in possession, situate within the district for which the vote is to be given, of the clear value of fifty pounds above all charges and encumbrances, and of or to which he has been seised or entitled, either at law or in equity, for at least six calendar months next before the last registration of electors, or having a leasehold estate in possession, situate within such district, of the clear annual value of ten pounds, held upon a lease which at the time of Such registration shall have not less than three years to run, or having a leasehold estate so situate, and of such value as aforesaid, of which he has been in possession for three years or upwards next before such registration, or being a householder within such district, occupying a tenement within the limits of a town (to be proclaimed as such by the Governor for the purposes of this Act) of the clear annual value of ten pounds, or without the limits of a town of the clear annual value of five pounds, and having resided therein six calendar months next before such registration as aforesaid, shall, if duly registered, be entitled to vote at the election of a member or members for the district. 8. Provided always that no person shall be entitled to
vo

fcte°anofCcertain offences disqualified.

^ ° a * a n y s u c ^ e l e c ^ o n w n 0 *s a n alien, or who at any time theretofore shall have been attainted or convicted of a n y treason, felony, or infamous offence within any part of Her Majesty's dominions, unless he shall have re-

CONSTITUTION ACT.

47

ceived a free pardon, or shall have undergone the sentence or punishment to which he shall have been adjudged for such offence. 9. I t shall be lawful for any member of any Provincial Members may Council, by writing under his hand, addressed to the H*^their Superintendent of the province, to resign his seat in the said Council; and upon the receipt by the Superintendent of such resignation the seat of such member shall become vacant. 10. If any member of any Provincial Council shall, for in certain two successive sessions of such Council, fail to give his blcoml void? attendance therein, or shall become bankrupt, or shall become an insolvent debtor within the meaning of the laws relating to insolvent debtors, or shall become a public defaulter, or be attainted of treason, or bo convicted of felony or any infamous offence, his seat in such Council shall thereupon become vacant. 11. Any question which shall arise respecting any Determination vacancy in a Provincial Council on occasion of any of tÓ vacancies.a3 tho matters aforesaid shall be heard and determined by such Council, on such question being referred to them for that purpose by the Superintendent of the province, and not otherwise. 12. Whenever it shall be established, to the satisfaction issue of writs of the Superintendent, that tho seat of any member of fancies' 1118 tho Provincial Council has become vacant, the Superintendent shall forthwith issue a writ for the election of a new member to serve in tho place so vacated during the remainder of tho term of the continuance of such Council, and no longer. 13. Every Provincial Council shall continue for the Duration of period of four years from the day of the return of the council."*1 writs for choosing the same, and no longer : Provided Dissolution, always that it shall be lawful for the Governor, by Proclamation or otherwise, sooner to dissolve the same, whenever he shall deem it expedient so to do. 14. The Governor shall cause the first writs for the when writs election of members of the Provincial Council of every a r e t 0 i s s u e ' province hereby established to be issued at some time not later than six calendar months next after the Proclamation of this Act in New Zealand ; and upon the expiration of the said period of the continuance of any Provincial Council, or upon the previous dissolution thereof, the Governor shall cause writs to be issued for the election of members of the ensuing Council. 15. It shall be lawful for the Superintendent, by convening of Proclamation in the Government Gazette, to fix such c°uacii.

48

THE NEW ZEALAND

placo or places within tho limits of the province, and such times for holding the first and every other session of tho Provincial Council as he may think fit, and from time to time, in manner aforesaid, to alter and vary such times and places as he may judge advisable, and most consistent with general convenience. Prorogation. 16. I t shall be lawful for the Superintendent to prorogue such Council from time to time, whenever he shall deem it expedient so to do. A session to bo 17. Provided always that there shall be a session of ycar.°very every Provincial Council once at least in every year, so that a greater period than twelve calendar months shall not intervene between the last sitting of the Council in one session, and the first sitting of tho Council in the next session. Ruperinten18. It shall be lawful for the Superintendent of each vmc\aincounoii province, with tho advice and consent of the Provincial may make Council thereof, to make and ordain all such laws and ordinances (except and subject as hereinafter mentioned) as m a y . be required for the peace, order, and good government of such province, provided that the same bo not repugnant to the law of England. Restrictions on 19. I t shall not be lawful for the Superintendent and legTslation. Provincial Council to make or ordain any law or ordinance for any of the purposes hereinafter mentioned ; that is to say,— (1.) The imposition or regulation of duties of Customs to be imposed on the importation or exportation of any goods at any port or placo in tho province : (2.) The establishment or abolition of any Court of Judicature of civil or criminal jurisdiction, except Courts for trying and punishing such offences as by the law of New Zealand are or may be made punishable in a summary way, or altering the constitution, jurisdiction, or practice of any such Court, except as aforesaid : (3.) Eegulating any of the current coin, or the issue of any bills, notes, or other paper currency : (4.) Eegulating the weights and measures to be used in the province, or any part thereof : (5.) Eegulating the post-offices, and tho carriage of letters within the province : (6.) Establishing, altering, or repealing laws relating to bankruptcy or insolvency : (7.) The erection and maintenance of beacons and lighthouses on the coast :

CONSTITUTION ACT.

49

(8.) The imposition of any dues or other charges on shipping at any port or harbour in the province : (9.) Eegulating marriages : (10.) Affecting lands of the Crown or lands to which the title of the aboriginal native owners has never been extinguished : (11.) Inflicting any disabilities or restrictions on persons of the Native race to which persons of European birth or descent would not also be subjected. (12.) Altering in any way the criminal law of New Zealand, except so far as relates to tho trial and punishment of such offences as are now or may, by the criminal law of New Zealand, be punishable in a summary way as aforesaid : (13.) Eegulating the course of inheritance of real or personal property, or affecting the law relating to wills. 20. Every Provincial Council shall, immediately on As to election their first meeting, and before proceeding to the dis- of s P e a k e r patch of any other business, elect one of their members to be the Speaker thereof during the continuance of such Council, which election, being confirmed by the Superintendent, shall be valid and effectual ; and in case of vacancy in the said office by death, resignation, or otherwise, then and so often as the same shall happen, the election shall be repeated and confirmed as aforesaid. 21. The Speaker of each Provincial Council shall speaker to preside at the meetings of such Council ; but, in his P resKle absence, some member elected by the Council shall preside. 22. No Provincial Council shall be competent to the Quorum, dispatch of any business unless one-third of the whole number of members be present. 23. All questions wrhich shall arise in any such Council Questions to shall be decided by the majority of votes of the mem- Ey majority'led bers present other than the Speaker or presiding mem- of votes. ber ; but, in all cases wherein the votes shall be equal, the Speaker or presiding member shall have a eastingvote. 24. Every Provincial Council at their first meeting, and standing from time to time afterwards, as occasion may require, adopted?be shall prepare and adopt such standing rules and orders as may be best adapted for the orderly conduct of the business of such Council, which rules and orders shall be laid before the Superintendent ; and, being by him approved, shall then become binding and in force. 4

50
Appropriation and issue of money.

THE NEW ZEALAND

25. I t shall not be lawful for any Provincial Council to pass, or for the Superintendent to assent to, any Bill appropriating any money to the public service, unless the Superintendent shall first have recommended to the Council to make provision for the specific service to which such money is to be appropriated ; and no such money shall be issued, or be made issuable, except by warrants to be granted by the Superintendent. 26. I t shall be lawful for the Superintendent to transSuperintendent may transmit drafts mit to the Provincial Council for their consideration the of laws for drafts of any such laws or ordinances as it may appear consideration to him desirable to introduce ; and all such drafts shall of Council. be taken into consideration in such convenient manner as in and by such rules and orders as aforesaid shall be in that behalf provided. Giving or with27. Every Bill passed by the Provincial Council shall holding assent be presented to the Superintendent for the Governor's to Bills. assent, and the Superintendent shall declare, according to his discretion (but subject, nevertheless, to the provisions .herein contained, and to such instructions as may from time to time be given him by the Governor), that lie assents to such Bill on behalf of the Governor, or that ho withholds the assent of the Governor, or that he reserves such Bill for the signification of the Governor's pleasure thereon : Provided always that it shall and may be lawful for the Superintendent, before declaring his pleasure in regard to any Bill so presented to him, to make such amendments in such Bill as he thinks needful or expedient, and to return such Bill with such amendments to such Council, and the consideration of such amendments by such Council shall take place in such convenient manner as shall in and by the rules and orders aforesaid be in that behalf provided : Provided also that all Bills altering or affecting the extent of the several electoral districts which shall be represented in the Provincial Council, or establishing new or other such electoral districts, or altering the number of the members of such Council to be chosen by the said districts respectively, or altering the number of the members of such Council, or altering the limits of any town, or establishing any new town, shall be so reserved as aforesaid. Superinten28. "Whenever any Bill shall have been assented to by dent to send copies of Bills the Superintendent as aforesaid the Superintendent shall assented to forthwith transmit to the Governor an authentic copy to Governor. thereof. * Disallowance 29. I t shall be lawful for the Governor, at any time of Bills within three months after any such Bill shall have been ¿LSsented to.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

51

received by him, to declare, by Proclamation, his disallowance of such Bill ; and such disallowance shall make void and annul the same from and after the day of the date of such Proclamation, or any subsequent day to be named therein. 30. No Bill which shall be reserved for the signification ^° ^jino have of the assent of the Governor shall have any force and assented to by authority within the province until the Superintendent G o T e r u o r shall signify, either by speech or message to the Provincial Council, or by Proclamation in the Government Gazette, that such Bill has been laid before the Governor, and that the Governor has assented to the same ; and a n entry shall be made in the Journals of the Provincial Council of every such speech, message, or Proclamation ; and a duplicate thereof, duly attested, shall be delivered to the Eegistrar of the Supreme Court, or other proper officer, to be kept among the records of the province ; and no Bill which shall be so reserved as aforesaid shall have any force or authority within the province, unless the assent of the Governor thereto shall have been so signified as aforesaid within three months next after the day on which such Bill shall have been presented to the Superintendent for the Governor's assent. 31. I t shall be lawful for the Governor from time to Govemoi may time to transmit to the Superintendent of any province, transmit
i i • -i . .. .,-, i i-i, instructions to

ior ins guidance m assenting to or withholding assent superintenfrom Bills, or reserving the same for the signification of ^TervfngBiiis. the Governor's pleasure thereon, such instruction as to the Governor shall seem fit ; and it shall be the duty of the Superintendent to act in obedience to such instructions. 32. There shall be within the Colony of New Zealand Establishment a General Assembly, to consist of the Governor, a Legis- AssemWyral lative Council, and House of Eepresentatives. 33. Por constituting the Legislative Council of New Appointment Zealand it shall be lawful for H e r Majesty, before the ^L^uiativa time to be appointed for the first meeting of the General council. Assembly, by an instrument under her Eoyal Sign Manual, to authorise the Governor, in H e r Majesty's name, to summon to the said Legislative Council such persons, being not less in number than ten, as Her Majesty shall think fit ; and it shall also be lawful for Her Majesty from time to time, in like manner, to authorise the Governor to summon to the said Legislative Council such other person or persons as H e r Majesty shall think fit, either for supplying any vacancy or vacancies, or otherwise ; and every person who shall be

52

T H E NEW ZEALAND

so summoned shall thereby become a member of the said Legislative Council : Provided always that no> person shall be summoned to such Legislative Council who shall not be of the full age of twenty-one years, and a natural-born subject of Her Majesty, or a subject of Her Majesty naturalised by Act of Parliament, or by an Act of the Legislature of New Zealand. Legislative 34. Every member of the Legislative Council of New Councillois may hold seats Zealand shall hold his seat therein for the term of his for life. life, subject, nevertheless, to the provisions hereinafter contained for vacating the same. Resignation of 35. It shall be lawful for any member of the said seat in Council Legislative Council, by writing under his hand, addressed to the Governor, to resign his seat in the said Council, and upon such resignation and acceptance thereof by the Governor the seat of such member shall become vacant. Causes by 36. If any Legislative Councillor of New Zealand shall, which seat for two successive sessions of the General Assembly, may be Ï acated. without the permission of Her Majesty or of the Governor, signified-by the said Governor to the Legislative Council, fail to give his attendance in the said Legislative Council, or shall take any oath, or make any declaration or acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to any foreign prince or power, or shall do, concur in, or adopt any act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of any foreign State or power, or become entitled to the rights, privileges, or immunities of a subject or citizen of any foreign State or power, or shall become bankrupt, or shall become an insolvent debtor within the meaning of the laws relating to insolvent debtors, or shall become a public defaulter, or be attainted of treason, or be convicted of felony, or any infamous crime, his seat in such Council shall thereby become vacant. 37. Any question which shall arise respecting any Trial of question vacancy in the said Legislative Council, on occasion of •whether seats are \ acated. any of the matters aforesaid, shall be referred by the Governor to the said Legislative Council, to be by the said Legislative Council heard and determined : Pro^ vided always that it shall be lawful, either for the person respecting whose seat such question shall have arisen or for Her Majesty's Attorney-General for New Zealand, on Her Majesty's behalf, to appeal from the determination of the said Council in such case to Her Majesty ; and the judgment of Her Majesty given, with the advice of her Privy Council thereon, shall be final and conclusive to all intents and purposes.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

53

38. The Governor shall have power and authority from Appointment time to time to appoint one member of the said Legislative L e^atïve 0 £ Council to be Speaker of such Council, and to remove him council. and appoint another in his stead. 39. The presence of at least five members of the said Quorum, Ac. Legislative Council, including the Speaker, shall be necessary to constitute a meeting for the exercise of its powers ; and all questions which shall arise in the said Legislative Council shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present other than the Speaker, and when the votes shall be equal the Speaker shall have the casting-vote. 40. For the purpose of constituting the House of Ee- rower to presentatives of New Zealand it shall be lawful for the H™se°of ïieGovernor, within the time hereinafter mentioned, and {Jre|®"*^m|! thereafter from time to time as occasion shall require, by tion in Her Proclamation in Her Majesty's name, to summon and call ^ ' y ' s together a House of Eepresentatives in and for New Zealand, such House of Eepresentatives to consist of such number of members, not more than forty-two nor less than twenty-four, as the Governor shall by Proclamation in that behalf direct and appoint ; and every such House of Eepresentatives shall, unless the General Assembly shall be sooner dissolved, continue for the period of five years from the day of the return of the writs for choosing such House, and no longer. 41. It shall be lawful for the Governor by Proclama- power to tion to constitute within New Zealand convenient electoral pr^mat/on districts for the election of members of the said House of to constitute Eepresentatives, and to appoint and declare the number districts, &c, of such members to be elected for each such district, and ^mbers°of°f to make provision (so far as may be necessary beyond the House of Eeprovision which may be made for the like purposes in presentatives. relation to elections for Provincial Councils) for the registration and revision of lists of all persons qualified to vote at the elections to be holden within such districts, and also provision for the appointing of Eeturning Officers, and for issuing, executing, and returning the necessary writs for elections of members of the House of Eepresentatives, and for taking the poll thereat, and otherwise for ensuring the orderly, effective, and impartial conduct of such elections ; and in determining the number and extent of such electoral districts, and the number of members to be elected for each district, regard shall be had to the number of electors within the same, so that the number of members to be assigned to any one district may bear to the whole number of the members of the House of Eepre-

54

THE NEW ZEALAND

sentatives, as nearly as may be, the same proportion as the number of electors within such district shall bear to the whole number of electors in New Zealand. 42. The members of the said House of Eepresentatives Qualification of voters for to be chosen in every electoral district appointed for that members of House of Ee- purpose shall be chosen by the votes of the inhabitants presentatives. of New Zealand who shall possess within such district the like qualifications which, when possessed within an electoral district appointed for the election of members of a Provincial Council, would entitle inhabitants of the province to vote in the election of members of the Provincial Council thereof, and who shall be duly registered as electors; and every person legally qualified as such elector shall be qualified to be elected a member of the said House. First writs to 43. The Governor shall cause the first writs for the be issued election of members of the said House of Eepresentatives within six months. to be issued at some time not later than six calendar months next after the Proclamation of this Act in New Zealand.; and upon the expiration of the said period of the continuance of the House of Eepresentatives, or upon the previous determination of such House by the dissolution of the General Assembly, the Governor shall cause writs to be issued for the election of members of the ensuing House of Eepresentatives. Time and place 44. The General Assembly of New Zealand shall be of holding the holden at any place and time within New Zealand which General Assembly. the Governor shall from time to time by Proclamation for that purpose appoint ; and the time so to be appointed for the first holding of such General Assembly shall be as soon as conveniently may be after the return of the first writs for the election of members of the said House of Prorogation Eepresentatives ; and the Governor may at his pleasure and dissoluprorogue or dissolve the General Assembly. tion. 45. The said House of Eepresentatives shall, until Disputed elections provision be made otherwise in that behalf by law, be judges without appeal of the validity of the election of each member thereof. 46. No member of the said Legislative Council or Xo member to sit or vote until House of Eepresentatives shall be permitted to sit or he has taken the oath of vote therein until he shall have taken and subscribed allegiance. the following oath before the Governor, or before some person or persons authorised by him to administer such oath :— " I, A.B., do sincerely promise and swear that I Oath of allegiance. will be faithful and bear true allegiance to H e r Majesty Queen Victoria. " So help me God."

CONSTITUTION ACT.

55

47. Every person authorised by law to make his Affirmation solemn affirmation or declaration, instead of taking an fnât&a'oiomi. oath, may make such affirmation or declaration in lieu of the said oath. 48. The said House of Eepresentatives shall imme- Speaker tobe diately on their first meeting proceed to the choice of meeting of one of their members as their Speaker during the con- pr0esentaftive"s. tinuancc of the said House, which choice, being confirmed by the Governor, shall be valid and effectual ; and in case of vacancy of the office by death, resignation, or otherwise, then and so often as the same shall happen, the choice shall be repeated and confirmed as aforesaid. 49. I t shall be lawful for any member of the said Eesignation of House of Eepresentatives, by writing under his hand bea,ta' addressed to the Speaker of the said House, to resign his seat in the said House, and upon such resignation the seat of such member shall become vacant. 50. If any member of the said House of Eepresen- vacating of tatives shall, for one whole session of the General As- Cases.m sembly, without the permission of such House, fail to give his attendance in the said House, or shall take any oath, or make any declaration or acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to any foreign prince or power, or do or concur in, or adopt any act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of any foreign State or power, or become entitled to the rights, privileges, or immunities of a subject of any foreign State or power, or shall become bankrupt, or shall become an insolvent debtor within the meaning of the laws relating to insolvent debtors, or shall become a public defaulter, or be attainted of treason, or be convicted of felony or any infamous crime, his seat in such House shall thereby become vacant. 51. When and so often as a vacancy shall occur as Election to aforesaid in any seat in the said House of Eepresen- vacancfeT ° n tatives, it shall and may be lawful for such House to address the Governor, stating the existence of such vacancy, and the car.se thereof; and the Governor, upon receiving such adc.ress, shall cause a writ to be issued for supplying such vacancy. 52. The said Legislative Council and House of Ee- standingruies presentatives, at the first sitting of each respectively, £" made™to and from time to time afterwards as there shall be occasion, shall prepare and adopt such standing rules and orders as shall appear to the said Council and House of Eepresentatives respectively best adapted for the

56

THE NEW ZEALAND.

Power of General Assembly to make laws.

As to the appropriation and issue of money.

orderly conduct of the business of such Council and House respectively, and for the manner in which such Council and House respectively shall be presided over in case of the absence of the Speaker, and for the mode in which such Council and House shall confer, correspond, and communicate with each other relative to votes or Bills passed by or pending in such Council and House respectively, and for the manner in which notices of Bills, resolutions, and other business intended to be submitted to such Council and House respectively at any session thereof, may be published in the Government Gazette or otherwise for general information, for some convenient space or time before the meeting of such Council and House respectively, and for the proper framing, entitling, and numbering of the Bills to be introduced into and passed by the said Council and House of Eepresentatives, all of which rules and orders shall by such Council and House respectively be laid before the Governor, and being by him approved shall become binding and of force, but subject, nevertheless, to the confirmation or disallowance of H e r Majesty in manner hereinafter provided respecting the Acts to be made by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives : Provided that no such rule or order shall be of force to subject any person, not being a member or officer of the Council or House to which it relates, to any pain, penalty, or forfeiture. 53. It shall be competent to the said General Assembly, except and subject as hereinafter mentioned, to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of New Zealand, provided that no such laws be repugnant to the law of England ; and the laws so to be made by the said General Assembly shall control and supersede any laws or ordinances in anywise repugnant thereto, which may have been made or ordained prior thereto by any Provincial Council ; and any law or ordinance made or ordained by any Provincial Council, in pursuance of the authority hereby conferred upon it, and on any subject whereon, under such authority as aforesaid, it is entitled to legislate, shall, so far as the same is repugnant to, or inconsistent with, any Act passed by the General Assembly, be null and void. 54. I t shall not be lawful for the House of Eepresentatives or the Legislative Council to pass, or for the Governor to assent to, any Bill appropriating to the public service any sum of money from or out of H e r

CONSTITUTION ACT.

57

Majesty's revenue within New Zealand, unless the Governor, on H e r Majesty's behalf, shall first have recommended to the House of Eepresentatives to make provision for the specific public service towards which such money is to be appropriated, and (save as herein otherwise provided) no part of H e r Majesty's revenue within New Zealand shall be issued, except in pursuance of warrants under the hand of the Governor directed to the public Treasurer thereof. 55. I t shall and may be lawful for the Governor to Governor may transmit by message to either the said Legislative o™»™ to araits Council or the said House of Eepresentatives, for their either House, consideration, the drafts of any laws which it may appear to him desirable to introduce, and all such drafts shall be taken into consideration in such convenient manner as shall, in and by the rules and orders aforesaid, be in that behalf provided. 56. Whenever any Bill which has been passed by the Governor may said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives refuse assent, shall be presented for H e r Majesty's assent to the Go- or reserve vernor, he shall declare, according to his discretion, but subject, nevertheless, to the provisions contained in this Act, and to such instructions as may from time to time be given in that behalf by H e r Majesty, her heirs, or successors, that he assents to such Bill in Her Majesty's name, or that he refuses his assent to such Bill, or that he reserves such Bill for the signification of Her Majesty's pleasure thereon : Provided always that it shall and may be lawful for the Governor, before declaring his pleasure in regard to any Bill so presented to him, to make such amendments in such Bill as he thinks needful or expedient, and by message to return such Bill with such amendments to the Legislative Council or the House of Eepresentatives, as he shall think the more fitting, and the consideration of such amendments by the said Council and House respectively shall take place in such convenient manner as shall, in and by the rules and orders aforesaid, be in that behalf provided. 57. I t shall be lawful for H e r Majesty, with the advice Governor to of her Privy Council, or under H e r Majesty's Signet and i™trudïôas Sign Manual, or through one of her principal Secretaries transmitted by of State, from time to time to convey to the Governor of H e r M a i e s t y New Zealand such instructions as to H e r Majesty shall seem meet, for the guidance of such Governor, for the exercise of the powers hereby vested in him, of assenting to, or dissenting from, or for reserving for the signifi-

58

T H E NEW ZEALAND

cation of Her Majesty's pleasure, Bills to be passed by the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives ; and it shall be the duty of such Governor to act in obedience to such instructions. As to disallow58. Whenever any Bill which shall have been preance by Her sented for H e r Majesty's assent to the Governor shall Majesty of Bills assented by such Governor have been assented to in Her Majesty's to by the name, he shall, by the first convenient opportunity, Governor. transmit to one of H e r Majesty's principal Secretaries of State an authentic copy of such Bill so assented to ; and it shall be lawful, at any time within two years after such Bill shall have been received by the Secretary of State, for Her Majesty, by Order in Council, to declare her disallowance of such Bill; and such disallowance, together with a certificate under the hand and seal of the Secretary of State, certifying the day on which such Bill was received as aforesaid, being signified by the Governor to the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives by speech or message, or by Proclamation in the Governrnent Gazette, shall make void and annul the same from and after the day of such signification. No reserved 59. No Bill which shall be reserved for the signifiBill to have any force until cation of Her Majesty's pleasure thereon shall have any assented to by Her Majesty. force or authority within New Zealand until the Governor shall signify, either by speech or message to the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives, or by Proclamation, that such Bill has been laid before H e r Majesty in Council, and that H e r Majesty has been pleased to assent to the same ; and an entry shall be made in the Journals of the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives of every such speech, message, or Proclamation, and a duplicate thereof, duly attested, shall be delivered to the Eegistrar of the Supreme Court, or other proper officer, to be kept among the records of New Zealand ; and no Bill which shall be so reserved as aforesaid shall have any force or authority within New Zealand unless H e r Majesty's assent thereto shall have been so signified as aforesaid within the space of two years from the day on which such Bill shall have been presented for H e r Majesty's assent to the Governor as aforesaid. 60. The Governor shall cause every Act of the said Acts to bo printed. General Assembly which he shall have assented to in H e r Majesty's name to be printed in the Government Gazette for general information, and such publication by such Governor of any such Act shall be deemed to be in law the promulgation of the same.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

59

61. It shall not be lawful for the said General Assembly Duties not to levied on to levy any duty upon articles imported for the supply of sbe „PpUo S.._ for Her Majesty's land or sea forces, or to levy any duty, d™e°i,b¿nor any impose any prohibition or restriction, or grant any ex- inconsistent emptions, bounty, drawback, or other privilege upon the w i U l treaties, importation or exportation of any articles, or to impose any dues or charges upon shipping contrary to, or at variance with, any treaty or treaties concluded by Her Majesty with any foreign Power. 62. The Governor is hereby authorised and required to Expenses of
.j,,, • • r i _ jj.* x „ collection of

pay out of the revenue arising from taxes, duties, rates, rerenn0i and imposts levied under any Act or Acts of the said •General Assembly, and from the disposal of waste lands of the Crown, all the costs, charges, and expenses incident to the collection, management, and receipt thereof ; also to pay out of the said revenue arising from the disposal of waste lands of the Crown such sums as may become payable under the provisions hereinafter contained, for or on account of the purchase of land from aboriginal natives, or the release or extinguishment of their rights in any land, and such sums as may become payable to the New Zealand Company under the provisions of this Act in respect of the sale or alienation of land : Provided always that full and particular accounts of all such disbursements shall from time to time be laid before the said Legislative Council and the House of Eepresentatives. 63. All costs, charges, and expenses of, or incident to, Auditor the collection, management, and receipt of duties of im- a c c o u n t s port and export shall be regulated and audited in such manner as shall be directed by the Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and all such costs, charges, and expenses in relation to other branches of the said revenue shall be regulated and audited in such manner as shall be directed by laws of the said General Assembly. 64. There shall be payable to H e r Majesty every year, Grants for civil out of the revenue arising from such taxes, duties, rates, a ^i" e a s ' c l a l and imposts, and from the disposal of such waste lands of the Crown in New Zealand the several sums mentioned in the Schedule to this Act ; such several sums to be paid for defraying the expenses of the services and purposes mentioned in such Schedule, and to be issued by the Treasurer of New Zealand in discharge of such warrants as shall be from time to time directed to him under the hand and seal of the Governor ; and the said Treasurer shall account to H e r Majesty for the same through

60

T H E NEW ZEALAND

the Commissioners of H e r Majesty's Treasury of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in such manner and form as H e r Majesty shall be graciously pleased to direct. How the 65. It shall be lawful for the General Assembly of New oFfumí11"011 Z e a l a n c l > by any Act or Acts, to alter all or any of granted may the sums mentioned in the said Schedule, and the apbe varied. propriatioii of such sums to the services and purposes therein mentioned ; but every Bill which shall be passed by the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives altering the salary of the Governor, or altering the sum described as for Native purposes, shall be reserved for the signification of H e r Majesty's pleasure thereon, and until and subject to such alteration by Act or x\cts as aforesaid, the salaries of the Governor and Judges shall be those respectively set against their several offices in the said Schedule ; and accounts in detail of the expenditure of the several sums for the time being appropriated under this Act, or such Act or Acts as aforesaid of the said General- Assembly, to the several services and purposes mentioned in the said Schedule,(shall be laid before the said Legislative Council and House of Eepresentatives within thirty days next after the beginning of the session after such expenditure shall have been made : Provided always that it shall not be lawful for the said General Assembly, by any such Act as aforesaid, to make any diminution in the salary of any Judge to take effect during * the continuance in office of any person being such Judge at the time of the passing of such Act. ^ Appropriation 66. After and subject to the payments to be made «f revenue. under the provisions hereinbefore contained, all the revenue arising from taxes, duties, rates, and imposts levied in virtue of any Act of the General Assembly, and from the disposal of waste lands of the Crown, under any such Act made in pursuance of the authority herein contained, shall be subject to be appropriated to such specific purposes as by any Act of the said General Assembly shall be prescribed in that behalf ; and the surplus of such revenue which shall not be appropriated as aforesaid shall be divided among the several provinces for the time being established in New Zealand under or by virtue of this Act, in the like proportions as the gross proceeds of the said revenue shall have arisen therein respectively, and shall be paid over to the respective Treasuries of such provinces for the public uses thereof, and shall bo subject to the appropriation of the respective Provincial Councils of such provinces.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

61

67. I t shall be lawful for the said General Assembly, Power to Geneby any Act or Acts, from time to time, to establish new j£ after^ec? electoral districts for the purpose of electing members of torai districts, the said House of Eepresentatives, to alter the boundaries members of ° of electoral districts for the time being existing for such ^"¡^"¿p, 6 " purposes, to alter aud appoint the number of members &c. to be chosen for such districts, to increase the whole number of members of the said House of Eepresentatives, and to alter and regulate the appointment of Eeturning Officers, and make provision in such manner as they may deem expedient for the issue and return of writs for the election of the members of such House, and the time and place of holding such elections, and for the determination of contested elections for such House. 68. It shall be lawful for the said General Assembly, Power to Geneby any Act or Acts, to alter from time to time any pro- Jomake'otner visions of this Act, and any laws for the time being in alterations in force concerning the election of members of the said tionCoftheu" House of Eepresentatives, and the qualification of electors House of lieand members : Provided that every Bill for any of such purposes shall be reserved for the signification of H e r Majesty's pleasure thereon, and a copy of such Bill shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament for the space of thirty days at the least before H e r Majesty's pleasure thereon shall be signified. 69. I t shall be lawful for the said General Assembly, Power to Geneby any Act or Acts, from time to time, to constitute new io^stîtute provinces in New Zealand, to direct and appoint the provinces, and number of members of which the Provincial Councils provisions thereof shall consist, and to alter the boundaries of any concerning provinces for the time being existing, and to alter the pro- members, &c. visions of this Act, and any laws for the time being in force respecting the election of members of the Provincial Councils, the powers of such Councils, and the distribution of the said surplus revenue between the several provinces of New Zealand : Provided always that any Bill for any of the said purposes shall be reserved for the signification of H e r Majesty's pleasure thereon. 70. I t shall be lawful for H e r Majesty, in and by any Her Majesty letters patent to be issued under the Great Seal of the Mumcipaïllsh United Kingdom, from time to time to constitute and Corporations, establish within any district or districts of New Zealand one or more Municipal Corporation or Corporations, and to grant to any such Corporation all or any of the powers which, in pursuance of the statutes in that behalf made and provided, it is competent to H e r Majesty to grant to the inhabitants of any town or borough in England and

62

THE NEW ZEALAND

Her Majesty

Wales incorporated in virtue of such statutes or any of them, and to qualify and restrict the exercise of any such powers in such and the same manner as, by the statutes aforesaid, or any of them, H e r Majesty may qualify or restrict the exercise of any such powers as aforesaid in England : Provided always that all provisions of any such letters patent, and all by - laws or regulations made by any such Corporation, shall be subject to alteration or repeal by any ordinance or Act of the Provincial Council for the province in which any such Corporation may be established, or of the General Assembly, according to their respective powers hereinbefore declared. 71. And whereas it may be expedient that the laws,

of abori 4nlaiWi" customs, and usages of the aboriginal or native inhabinativo inhabi- tants of New Zealand, so far as they are not repugnant mahitahSod. t o t n e general principles of humanity, should for the present be maintained for the government of themselves, in all their relations to and dealings with each other, and that particular districts should be set apart within which such laws, customs, or usages should be so observed : I t shall be lawful for her Majesty, by any letters patent to be issued under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, from time to time to make provision for the purposes aforesaid, any repugnancy of any such Native laws, customs, or usages to the law of England, or to any law, statute, or usage in force in New Zealand, or in any part thereof, in anywise notwithstanding, rower to Gene- 72. Subject to the provisions herein contained, it shall to rebate315' °e lawful for the said General Assembly to make laws Baies°ot waste for regulating.the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation of lands. ^ e w a s ( - e i a n ( jg 0 f t h e Crown in New Zealand ; and all lands wherein the title of Natives shall be extinguished as hereinafter mentioned, and all such other lands as are described in an Act of the session holden in the tenth and eleventh years of Her Majesty, chapter one hundred and twelve, to promote colonisation in New Zealand, and to authorise a loan to the New Zealand Company, as demesne lands of the Crown, shall be deemed and taken to be waste lands of the Crown within the meaning of this Act : Provided always that, subject to the said provisions and until the said General Assembly shall otherwise enact, it shall be lawful for H e r Majesty to regulate such sale, letting, disposal, and occupation by instructions to be issued under the Signet and Eoyal Sign Manual, saving a-, to 73. I t shall not be lawful for any person other than Her aborfgmai0 Majesty, her heirs or successors, to purchase, or in anynative tribes.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

63

wise acquire or accept, from the aboriginal natives, land of or belonging to or used or occupied by them in common as tribes or communities, or to accept any release or extinguishment of the rights of such aboriginal natives in any such land as aforesaid; and no conveyance or transfer, or agreement for the conveyance or transfer, of any such land, either in perpetuity or for any term or period, either absolutely or conditionally, and either in property or by way of lease or occupancy, and no such release or extinguishment as aforesaid shall be of any validity or effect unless the same be made to, or entered into with, and accepted by, H e r Majesty, her heirs or successors : Provided always that it shall be lawful for H e r Majesty, her heirs and successors, by instructions under the Signet and Eoyal Sign Manual, or signified through one of Her Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, to delegate her powers of accepting such conveyances or agreements, releases, or relinquishments, to the Governor of New Zealand, or the Superintendent of any province within the limits of such province, and to prescribe or regulate the terms on which such conveyances or agreements, releases or extinguishments shall be accepted. 74. And whereas, under and by virtue of the said 10 & 11 Vict, last-mentioned Act, and of a notice given on the fourth c ' J ' day of July, one thousand eight hundred and fifty, by the New Zealand Company, in pursuance of such Act, the sum of two hundred and sixty-eight thousand three hundred and seventy pounds fifteen shillings, with interest, after the yearly rate of three pounds ten shillings per centum upon the said sum, or so much thereof as shall from time to time remain unpaid, is charged upon and payable to the New Zealand Company out of the proceeds of the sales of the demesne lands of the Crown in New Zealand : I n respect of all sales or other alienations of any waste upon an sales lands of the Crown in New Zealand in fee-simple, or for oL^fomthpS any less estate or interest (except by way of license for of the sum to occupation for pastoral purposes for any term of years zl¿Sanatcom-w not exceeding seven, and not containing any contract for panytiiitheir the renewal of the same or for a further estate, interest, or discharged, license, or by way of reservation of such lands as may be required for public roads or other internal communications, whether by land or water, or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants of the country, or for purposes of military defence, or as the sites of places of public worship, schools, or other public buildings, or as places for the interment of the dead, or places for the

64

T H E NEW ZEALAND

recreation and amusement of the inhabitants of any town or village, or as the sites of public quays or landingplaces on the sea coast, or shores of navigable streams, or for any other purpose of public safety, convenience, health, or enjoyment), there shall be paid to the said New Zealand Company, towards the discharge of the principal sum and interest charged as aforesaid, in lieu of all and every other claim of the said company in respect of the said sum, except where otherwise hereinafter provided, so long as the same, or any part thereof respectively shall remain unpaid, one-fourth part of the sum paid by the purchaser in respect of every such sale or Power to New alienation : Provided always that it shall be lawful for Zealand Company to release the New Zealand Company, by any resolution of a lands from majority of the proprietors of the said company present payments, &c. at any meeting of such proprietors, and certified under the common seal of such company, to release all or any part of the said lands from the moneys or payment charged thereon by the said Act, or this Act, or any part of such moneys or payment, either absolutely or upon any terms or conditions as such proprietors may think fit. Saving as to 75. I t shall not be lawful for the said General Assembly Canterbury to repeal or interfere with all or any of the provisions of Settlement lands. an Act of the session holden in the thirteenth and fourteenth years of H e r Majesty, chapter seventy, intituled 13 & 14 Vict., c. " An Act empowering the Canterbury Association to 70, and la & 15 dispose of certain Lands in New Zealand," or of an Act Vict., c. 84. passed in the session then next following, chapter eightyfour, to alter and amend the said first-mentioned Act : Provided always that on the expiration, or sooner determination, of the functions, powers, and authorities now vested in, or lawfully exercised by the said association, the provisions of the present Act shall come into force as regards the lands to which the said Acts relate. 76. I t shall be lawful for the Canterbury Association, Power to Canterbury at any time after a Provincial Council shall have been Association to transfer their constituted under this Act for the Province of Canterpowers to the bury, to transfer to the said Council all such functions, Provincial Council. powers, and authorities, and the said Council is hereby empowered to accept such transfer upon such terms and conditions as shall be agreed upon between the said Council and the said association : Provided always that nothing contained in such terms and conditions shall interfere with the rights of H e r Majesty, h e r heirs and successors, or of the New Zealand Company respectively ; and from and after such time a s

CONSTITUTION ACT.

65

shall be agreed upon between the said Council and the said association, the said Council shall have and be entitled to exercise all the said functions, powers, and authorities. 77. Nothing in this Act or in any Act, law, or Saving as to ordinance to be made by the said General Assembly, ^nnTTrust or by any Provincial Assembly, shall effect or interfere with so much of an Act of the session holden in the fourteenth and fifteenth years of Her Majesty, chapter eighty-six, intituled " A n Act to regulate the Affairs of M & is Vict., certain Settlements established by the New Zealand ° 8S' Company in New Zealand,'' as relates to the administration of the fund for the public purposes of the settlement of Nelson. 78. And whereas certain terms of purchase and Power to Her pasturage of land in the settlement of Otago had been regulate the issued by the New Zealand Company before the fourth disposal of day of July, one thousand eight hundred and fifty, and otago the said terms, or part of them, were in force on that day as contracts between the New Zealand Company and the association of lay members of the Free Church of Scotland, commonly called the Otago Association ; And whereas, by the provisions of the said Act of the tenth and eleventh years of Her Majesty, and of the said notice given by the New Zealand Company, the lands of the said company in New Zealand reverted to and became vested in Her Majesty as part of the demesne lands of the Crown, subject nevertheless to any contract then subsisting in regard to any of the said lands : And whereas it is expedient that provision should be made to enable H e r Majesty to fulfil the contracts contained in such terms of purchase and pasturage as aforesaid. I t shall be lawful for H e r Majesty for that purpose to make provision, by way of regulations to be contained in any charter to be granted to the said association, for the disposal of the lands to which the said terms of purchase and pasturage relate, so far as the same are still in force as aforesaid, and for varying from time to time such regulations, with such consent by or on behalf of the said association as in any such charter or instructions shall be specified, and for fixing the boundaries thereof, and for enabling the said association to transfer its powers to the Provincial Council for the Province of Otago : Provided always that no such charter shall be granted or have effect for any longer term than ten years from the passing of this Act ; but one of H e r

66

T H E NEW ZEALAND

Majesty's principal Secretaries of State may at any time during the term for which such charter shall be granted, by writing under his hand, extend the term for which such charter shall have been granted for such further time as in his discretion he may think fit : Provided always that it shall not be lawful for H e r Majesty, by any such regulations as aforesaid, to diminish the sum now payable to the New Zealand Company in respect of all waste land sold under the said terms of purchase, unless with the consent of the New Zealand Company, signified as hereinbefore proNo Act of the vided; and during the continuance of such charter as General aforesaid it shall not be lawful for the said General intorfèrewith Assembly to repeal or interfere with any such regulation «we with ti°ns respecting lands in Otago, except with such conconsént, &c. sent by or on behalf of the Otago Association as in any such charter or instructions may be provided, and (so far as the rights of the New Zealand Company may be affected) with the consent of such company signified as hereinbefore provided ; and svery Bill which shall repeal or interfere with any such regulations shall be reserved for the signification of H e r Majesty's pleasure thereon. Her Majesty 79. I t shall be lawful for H e r Majesty, by any such certafnpowers letters patent aforesaid, or instructions under H e r to Governor Majesty's Signet and Sign Manual, or signified through one of H e r Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, to delegate to the Governor any of the powers hereinbefore reserved to H e r Majesty respecting the removal of Superintendents of provinces, and the regulation of the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation, of waste lands, the establishment of Municipal Corporations, and the preservation of aboriginal laws, customs, and usages, interpretation^ 80. I n the construction of this Act the term ' ' Governor ' ' ana"Newnor shall mean the person for the time being lawfully adzeaiand." ministering the government of New Zealand ; and for the purpose of this Act " New Zealand " shall be held to include all territories, islands, and countries lying between thirty-three degrees of south latitude and fifty degrees of south latitude, and one hundred and sixty-two degrees of east longitude, and one hundred and seventythree degrees of west longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich. meToTaíis ^ " T n * s ^ c t s n a 1 1 ^ e P r o c l a i m e d in New Zealand Act? ° * by the Governor thereof within six weeks after a copy of such Act shall have been received by such Governor, and, save as herein expressly provided, shall take effect in New Zealand from the day of such Proclamation thereof.

CONSTITUTION ACT.

67

82. The proclamation of this Act, and all Proclamations Proclamations to be made under the provisions thereof, shall be pub- *° the'ifeu>shed lished in the New Zealand Government Gazette. Zealand
Gazette.
SCHEDULE E E F E E E E D TO I N T H E F O E E G O I N G A C T . Schedule.

Governor ... ... ... ... Chief Justice ... ... ... ... Puisne Judge... .. ... ... Establishment of the General Government Native purposes ... ... ...

£2,500 1,000 800 4,700 7,000 £16,000

