January 21, 1948
PRELIMINARY TITLE

Chapter I Bases of the State Art. 1. Nicaragua is a unitary, free, sovereign and independent State.
Art. 2. The basis of the national territory is the uti possidetia juris of

1821. The territory lies between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and the republics of Honduras and Costa Rica, and includes also the adjacent islands, the territorial sea, the continental shelves, and the aerial and stratospheric space. Treaties and laws shall fix the boundaries that are not yet determined. Art. 3. The territory and sovereignty are indivisible and inalienable. However, treaties may be made which tend to a union with one or more republics of Central America or which have as their object the construction, improvement, operation and defense of an interoceanic canal across the national territory, or the temporary use by an American power, exclusively for the continental defense, of lands, the air, the stratosphere, or the territorial waters. Art. 4. No person or group of persons may usurp the representation of the people or their rights, nor make petitions in their name. The infraction of this article is a crime. Art. 5. Spanish is the official language of the Republic. Art. 6. The State has no official religion. Art 7. Nicaragua renounces war of aggression and intervention in the internal affairs of other States. It supports the principles set forth in the Atlantic Charter; it recognizes the right of self-determination of peoples and arbitration as a method of settling international conflicts. Art. 8. The people are the source of all political power. They exercise it through the government of the State, which is subject to the Constitution and the laws. Art. 9. The government of the State is republican and democratically representative. The following are organs of the Government; the legislative power, the executive power, and the judicial power. Art. 10. The organs of the government are limited and independent in the exercise of their exclusive functions; but they collaborate harmoniously in the realization of the purposes of the State.
' Translation from official text in La Gaceta, Diario Oficial, aflo XLIII, No. 16, January 22, 1948.

Art. 11. Public officials have no authority other than that which may have been expressly conferred on them by the laws. Art. 12. The territory, for purposes of political organization, is divided into departments, and the latter are subdivided into municipalities.
The Department of Managua has, in addition, the local jurisdiction which is called the National District. The limits and authority of the departments, the municipalities, and the National District will be the object of laws. Art. 13. The residence of the Supreme Powers of the State is Managua, capital of the Republic. TITLE I NATIONALITY Art. 14. Art. 15. Nicaraguans are so by birth or naturalization. Those by birth are:

(1) Those born in the territory of Nicaragua with the exception of children of foreigners who are in Nicaragua in the service of their government and children of transient foreigners; (2) Children of Nicaraguan father or mother, born abroad, from the time when they reside in Nicaragua or when, by the law of their place of birth, they would have Nicaraguan nationality, or the right to elect and they choose to be Nicaraguans. The children of Nicaraguans born abroad while their mother or father was in the service of the Republic are Nicaraguans even for purposes for which the fundamental laws, or any others, require birth in the national territory; (3) Citizens by birth of the other republics of Central America who reside in Nicaragua and personally show, before a competent authority, the desire to become Nicaraguans, provided reciprocity exists in the country of origin and to the extent of such reciprocity. Art. 16. The following are naturalized citizens: (1) Foreigners resident in the country who obtain letters of naturalization in accordance with the law. In this case, the applicant must previously renounce his nationality before the respective authority and manifest his desire to adopt Nicaraguan nationality; (2) A foreign woman who marries a Nicaraguan, if, while residing in Nicaragua, she shows a desire to acquire Nicaraguan nationality. Art. 17. Neither matrimony nor its dissolution shall affect the nationality of those married or of their children. Art. 18. Nicaraguan nationality is lost: (1) By America. any time (2) By voluntary naturalization in a foreign country that is not in Central He who thus loses it will recover the quality of Nicaraguan if at he returns to Nicaragua; cancelation of the letters of naturalization.

Art. 19. Foreigners naturalized in Nicaragua shall lose Nicaraguan nationality when they adopt and propagate political or racial doctrines which involve the renunciation of the country and the sovereignty of the Republic or which tend to destroy the democratic form of government. The foreigner who thus loses his nationality may not recover it. Art. 20. The procedures for naturalization and the manner of acquiring, losing, and recovering nationality, shall be regulated by law.

Art. 21. Nicaraguans shall enjoy all the rights accorded by the Constitution and the laws and they are obliged to defend the country, to respect the authorities, to obey the laws, to contribute to the maintenance of the nation and its moral and material advancement, and to render military and other services required by the State.
TITLE II
ALIENS

Art. 22. Aliens shall enjoy in Nicaragua all the civil rights and guarantees accorded to Nicaraguans, subject to no limitations other than those established by the laws. They shall be obliged to respect the authorities, to obey the laws, and to pay all ordinary and extraordinary taxes to which Nicaraguans are subject. Art. 23. Aliens must not interfere in any manner in the political activities of the country. For violations of law, without prejudice to the responsibilities which they may incur, they may be expelled without previous trial, by the President of the Republic in Council of Ministers, except in the case of a foreigner who has a Nicaraguan wife or legitimate children by a Nicaraguan woman recognized prior to the act which is to be punished. Art. 24. Aliens may make claims against and demand compensation from the State only in the cases and in the manner in which Nicaraguans may do so; neither Nicaraguans nor aliens may claim compensation from the State for injury to their persons or property resulting from acts other than those of legitimate authorities acting in their public character. Art. 25. Aliens may not have recourse to diplomatic protection except in cases of denial of justice. The fact that an executory decision is unfavorable to the claimant does not constitute denial of justice. Those who act in violation of this provision shall lose the right to live in the country. Art. 26. Aliens may hold public positions only in the departments of public welfare and education or in those for which special technical qualifications are required and even in those cases subject to the condition that the said positions do not entail authority or jurisdiction. Art. 27. Extradition of aliens for political offenses or common crimes connected therewith may not be granted. The definition of such offenses and crimes shall be made in treaties or, in default thereof, by the Supreme Court of Justice.
TITLE III
CITIZENSHIP

Art. 28. Nicaraguans over twenty-one years of age, and those over eighteen years who know how to read and write, or who are married, are citizens. Art. 29. The following are rights of the citizen: to be elected or appointed to public offices; to meet, associate, and make petitions for political purposes, all in accordance with the law. Art. 30. The following are obligations of the citizen: (1) To inscribe himself in the electoral registers or catalogues; (2) To vote in the popular elections; (3) To fulfill, except for excuse, defined by law, the duties of public office.

The laws shall regulate these obligations and determine the penalties for their infraction. They shall also determine when women may exercise the suffrage. For the adoption of measures in this respect, a majority of at least three-fourths is required. With respect to eligibility women shall be on the same footing as men, except as expressly provided by the Constitution or the laws. Art. 31. The rights of citizenship are suspended: (1) For mental incapacity; (2) For a prison sentence, declaration of grounds for prosecution, or imposition of severe corporal punishment; (3) For being a fraudulent debtor; 4) For vagrancy or habitual drunkenness, 5) For acting in the employment of a foreign nation in Nicaragua without a proper license; (6) For exercising violence, coercion, corruption, or fraud in elections or for advocating or proclaiming abstinence from voting; (7) For ingratitude toward parents or unjust abandonment of legitimate or recognized illegitimate minor children; (8) For lending aid to another country or to a foreign citizen in any diplomatic claim or before an international tribunal; (9) In the other cases in which the law imposes suspension as a penalty. For suspension for the reasons stated in paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 7, and 9 previous judicial resolution is necessary. The law will regulate the manner of reestablishment of the exercise of citizenship. With the exception of those who advocate or proclaim abstinence from voting, the active vote of the citizen is also suspended in all the cases enumerated in this article. Art. 32. The popular vote is personal and untransferable, equal and direct. Art. 33. Every direct popular election of a collegiate body shall be made in accordance with a law of minority representation.
TITLE IV
RIGHTS AND GUARANTEES

Art. 34. The death penalty shall be imposed only in case of treason to the country in a foreign war and against those who commit serious crimes of a purely military order. Art. 35. The State guarantees individual liberty. This liberty may not be restricted except in conformity with the laws. Art. 36. No one may be detained without a written order of a public official expressly empowered by law, except in the case of flagrant crime. In such cases, the offender may be arrested by anyone in order to be turned over to the authority which has the power of arrest. Art. 37. Every prisoner shall be set at liberty or turned over to the competent authority within twenty-four hours following the act of detention, plus the necessary term of transit, in each case. Art. 38. Any person detained or threatened with detention, or, on his behalf, any other inhabitant of the Republic, may verbally or in writing apply to the competent court for a writ of habeas corpus, in accordance with the provisions for proceedings for guarantees or protection. Art. 39. The proceedings for guarantees or protection shall be established by the law applicable to the case.

Art. 40. Trials shall be public. The defendant, in person or by counsel, shall have the right to be present even at the indictment. Art. 41. Trial by jury is established in criminal cases. Art. 42. All detention for inquiry shall be without effect or shall be changed to imprisonment within ten days after the person detained has been turned over to a competent judge. No person may be sentenced to imprisonment without full proof that a crime has been committed and without at least a serious presumption that that person is the guilty party. The provisions of this article do not apply to military crimes, which shall be regulated by the pertinent law. Art. 43. Any restraint of personal liberty for debts or purely civil obligations is prohibited, except judicial compulsion in cases determined by law. Art. 44. Only acts or omissions declared punishable by law before their commission shall be punished. Art. 45. No one may be removed from trial before the judge legally responsible therefor, or taken to an exceptional jurisdiction. Nevertheless, the authors of and accomplices in revolutionary acts of terrorism and banditry shall be judged and punished by military courts in accordance with the law. Art. 46. No one may be deprived of his right of defense. Art. 47. Penalties shall be imposed only on the person who has committed the offense. Art. 48. Prisons are establishments of security and social defense. They shall serve as a means of preventing crime, to reeducate the prisoner, and prepare him for work. Any act of cruelty or torture against the accused or prisoners is prohibited. Art. 49. No one may be obliged in a criminal, correctional, or police matter to testify against himself, against his spouse, or against his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity. Art. 50. The State is not obliged to surrender its nationals; but if extradition is demanded of it, it must judge them for the common offense committed. Art. 51. There is no jurisdiction by attraction, except as provided in Article 45. Art. 52. The enactment of proscriptive laws or of laws imposing an infamous punishment or a sentence for more than thirty years is prohibited. Art. 53. In case of the infraction of a constitutional precept to the injury of any one, a superior order does not exempt the agent who executes the order from responsibility. Military personnel in actual service are excepted from this measure. With respect to them the responsibility shall fall on the superior officer who gives the order. Art. 54. The State guarantees the inviolability of the home. The dwelling of any person in Nicaraguan territory may be forcibly entered only by the authorities in the following cases: (1) In the actual pursuit of a delinquent; (2) To remove a criminal surprised in flagrante;
. (3) For complaints from the interior of the habitation; for the commission in it of a crime or for scandalous disorder that requires prompt remedy; (4) In the case of fire, earthquake, flood, epidemic, or anything similar; (5) For any visit or inspection for statistical, sanitary, or hygienic reasons; (6) To liberate a person illegally held; (7) To remove objects required by virtue of a trial, when there is at least some proof of the presence of the said objects; (8) To execute a resolution, mandate, or judicial order legally decreed; (9) To apprehend a culprit against whom has been issued an act of detention or imprisonment, when there is at least some proof that he is hiding in the house to be entered. In the last four cases the house may not be broken into except by virtue of a written order and under direction of a competent authority. When the domicile to be entered is not that of the prisoner who is being pursued, the authority or its agents shall first solicit the permission of the occupant. Breaking into houses in the cases requiring written permission of a competent authority may not occur from seven at night until six in the morning without the consent of the head of the house. Art. 55. Every person may freely move throughout the national territory and choose his residence and domicile therein, and may not be compelled to change it, except by virtue of a final judgment. The right to emigrate and immigrate is recognized, within the limitations prescribed by law. Art. 56. No one is bound to do that which the law does not command, nor may he be prevented from doing that which the law does not prohibit. Art. 57. By no law may Nicaraguans be included in a black list or a proclaimed list, nor made to suffer in Nicaragua the consequences of being so listed in other countries. This does not prevent their being tried in accordance with the laws of the Republic for disloyal acts committed by them in case of foreign war. Art. 58. Property is inviolable. No one may be deprived of his own property except by judicial decree or for reasons of public utility or social interest, determined by law and upon due compensation beforehand determined by judicial authority. In case of civil war, internal disturbance, or public disaster, the competent authorities may make use of private property to the extent required by the public good without affecting, however, the right to subsequent indemnification. Art. 59. The State guarantees and protects intellectual property, the rights of authors, inventors, and artists. The law will regulate the exercise and the duration of such rights. Art. 60. The exercise of property rights is subject to the limitations imposed by the maintenance and progress of the social order. In harmony with this principle the law may burden property with obligations or servitudes of public benefit and laws may be passed to regulate questions of lease and rent. Art. 61. Property, whoever the owner may be, is governed exclusively by the laws of the Republic. Art. 62. For reasons of public or social interest, the law may establish restrictions or prohibitions in regard to the acquisition and transfer of

certain kinds of property because of its nature, condition, or location in the territory. Art. 63. For purposes of general interest the State may direct the exploitation and management of public utilities and may even nationalize them, after indemnification in the latter case. Art. 64. There shall be no confiscation of property, except against the nationals of an enemy country and without exceeding seventy-five per cent of the capital in the case of a foreigner married to a Nicaraguan woman or having Nicaraguan children. Twenty-five per cent shall be put aside for the benefit of such Nicaraguan wife and Nicaraguan children. The proceeds of the confiscation will be used, in the first instance, to repay confiscations or exactions suffered by Nicaraguans at the hands of the enemy country. The right to recover property illegally confiscated shall never be barred by limitation. In no case shall property be sequestered or seized for reasons or offenses of a political character, except against the nationals of an enemy country. The authorities violating these provisions shall be liable at all times with their persons and property for the damage inflicted. Art. 65. Every person may freely dispose of his property for any legal purpose except as provided by law in regard to marriage portions and alimony. Any curtailment of property or any creation of estates in mortmain is prohibited, except where it applies to family estates or charitable institutions. Art. 66. The law shall provide the organization and regulation of the family estate, on the basis that it shall be inalienable, free from attachment, and exempt from all public burdens. Art. 67. Marriage, the family, and maternity are under the protection and defense of the State. Art. 68. The State and the municipalities shall supervise the health and social betterment of the family. Art. 69. The education of children is the primary duty and natural right of the parents, in order that they may obtain the greatest physical, intellectual, and social development. Art. 70. Parents without economic resources are entitled to solicit the aid of the State for the education of their children. Art. 71. The State shall endeavor to provide special assistance to large families. Art. 72. Parents have the same duties toward children born out of wedlock as toward those born in wedlock. Art. 73. The civil laws shall regulate the investigation of paternity. Art. 74. The application of any sum appropriated in accordance with the law for social purposes may not be changed or modified by any law or act of the government under any pretext whatsoever. The State shall supervise the administration and expenditure of such appropriations. Art. 75. All the artistic or historic wealth of the country, whoever the owner may be, constitutes the cultural treasure of the nation, and shall enjoy the special protection and care of the State. Art. 76. Religious edifices and their dependencies, destined exclusively for the service of a cult, are exempt from contributions. Art. 77. The State recognizes the freedom of contract, commerce, and industry. This freedom may not be altered in any way except as provided by Article 60 and in cases of established and declared general economic emergency. The law shall prescribe the requirements governing their exercise and the guarantees which are to be accorded to them. Art. 78. Any concession affecting the natural resources of the State must be granted in accordance with laws previously passed, and such concessions may in no case constitute monopolies of such resources. Art. 79. All services shall be compensated, except those gratuitously rendered by virtue of law or agreement. Art. 80. Usury is prohibited. The law fixing the maximum limit of interest on money is of a public order. The same law shall determine the penalties which shall be applied to violators. Art. 81. Unions or associations may be established for any object that is not unlawful, but it is incumbent upon the State to authorize corporative and economic organizations. Art. 82. The State guarantees the freedom of work, every person being at liberty to engage in the profession, industry, or trade of his own choice, provided it is not opposed to morality, public health, or public security. Vagrancy is punishable. Art. 83. Laborers and employees are guaranteed: (1) Obligatory weekly rest; (2) The maximum day of work according to its nature. Excepted from the limitation of the working day are managers, administrators, attorneys-in-fact and all those who work without immediate supervision; (3) A minimum wage assuring a minimum of well-being compatible with human dignity, determined in accordance with the cost of living and the conditions and needs of the various regions; (4) Payment of wages within a period fixed in the contract, not greater than one week if the worker is a laborer, and fifteen days if he is an employee, at the place where the worker renders services, provided that such payment may not be made in merchandise, promissory notes, counters or other attempted substitutes for money; (5) Indemnification for accidents and risks of work in the cases and manner determined by law; (6) Special regulation of the labor of women and children; (7) Medical assistance provided by social institutions established for the purpose; (8) To the pregnant woman a rest of twenty days before and forty after the birth. This rest shall be paid for by the employer in whose service she is, provided that she has worked for him six continuous months; (9) Double the usual pay for night work, except in the cases in which it is done periodically by turns; (10) Prohibition of attachment of the minimum wage, except in cases of judicial order for alimony; (11) Fifteen days of vacation with pay after six months of continuous work. Of such vacation one week shall be of obligatory rest, and for the remainder of the time the worker or employee may choose to continue at work for the corresponding wages or salary; (12) That they shall not be discharged, when the contract is for an indefinite time, without one month's notice, with two hours a day to look for work, unless the laborer or employee has given legal cause for discharge. Those who serve the State in its institutions shall be governed by special laws to be issued concerning this matter.

Art. 84. The following conditions shall be void and shall not bind the contracting parties in connection with work: (1) Those that restrict or modify the guarantees and rights recognized by the Constitution with regard to every man and citizen; (2) Those that involve the direct or indirect obligation to acquire consumer goods at any specified stores or places; (3) Those that stipulate in the contract a term greater than two years, whenever such a term is prejudicial to the worker. Art. 85. The State shall establish a national institute for social insurance. The law shall regulate the manner of establishing the insurance fund in favor of wage earners, on the basis of a reasonable contribution on the part of the State, the beneficiary and the employer to cover the risks of illness, disability, old age, and unemployment. Art. 86. The system of primary, intermediate and professional education is under the technical supervision of the State. Art. 87. Primary education is compulsory, and that which is given at the expense of the State and public corporations shall be gratuitous and secular. Art. 88. Professorship in official educational institutions is a public career and is entitled to the benefits which the law provides. Art. 89. The granting of academic and professional degrees is an exclusive function of the State, which shall determine what professions require degrees for the practice thereof and what examinations and requisites are necessary to obtain them. Degrees for professional practice may not be issued prior to a showing of academic approval of the required courses. Art. 90. Agricultural or industrial enterprises, where there are more than thirty children of school age, are obliged to maintain an elementary school. Art. 91. The State guarantees academic freedom provided that there is no violation of good conduct and public order. Art. 92. No certificates other than those corresponding to a function, a profession or a university degree shall be granted. Art. 93. Liberty of conscience, the expression of any religious belief, and the practice of any religion not opposed to morality, good customs, or public order, are guaranteed. Acts of worship incompatible with the life or physical integrity of the human person are excepted. Acts contrary to morality or subversive of the public order which are done on the occasion or under the pretext of practising a religion are subject to the penalty and mode of trial prescribed by law. Art. 94. No one may be compelled to declare officially his religious beliefs except in a statistical interrogation ordered by law. Art. 95. Public cemeteries are secular in character. The ministers of any religious denomination may observe in them their respective rites. Art. 96. No one may be molested or persecuted on account of his opinions, but those who express opinions which are contrary to public order, to the republican and democratic form of government, to the established social order, to morality and good customs, or which may injure a third party, shall be subject to the penalties of the law. Art. 97. Every person has the right to express freely his ideas and opinions, by word of mouth, or by any other method of publication, without prejudice to his responsibility, in the manner determined by law, for the abuses he commits, the editor or publisher being deemed to be coauthor in appropriate cases. There shall be no previous censorship, except in the interest of morality and good conduct or to prevent war propaganda or violent methods for the subversion of political or social order. Art. 98. The right to assemble in the open air and the right to make a public demonstration shall be subject to police regulations. Art. 99. No previous permission is necessary for peaceful meetings without arms. Art. 100. The State does not recognize the legal existence of political parties of international organization, nor that of communist and fascist parties or parties of similar aims under other designations. Individuals who belong to such parties may not hold any public office and shall be subject to the penalties provided by law. The only exceptions are the international parties which, not being communist or totalitarian, advocate the union of Central America. Art. 101. Every person has the right to address petitions or claims in writing to the public officials and authorities, to have a decision respecting such petitions and claims, and to be informed of the action taken. This right may be exercised individually or collectively. Art. 102. Only for reasons of public interest and by general law applicable to the whole country may taxes be established, existing taxes increased, or their payment excused in whole or in part. Art. 103. There are no personal privileges in the matter of taxes and other public burdens. Taxes and imposts shall be levied in proportion to the value of property or at such progressive rate as may be fixed by law. Art. 104. No public power may remove cases pending before a competent authority. Art. 105. The opening of closed judgments or cases is prohibited. In criminal matters the recourse of revision of closed judgments may be admitted in favor of the accused when a severe corporal penalty has been imposed. Art. 106. The registry of civil status is under the exclusive control of the State. Art. 107. No law has retroactive force or effect, except in penal cases in favor of the delinquent. Art. 108. Every person who has the free control of his property may settle his civil affairs by compromise or arbitration, except in cases involving alimony or civil status of individuals. As regards persons who do not have such free control, the law shall determine how and when they may so settle their affairs. Art. 109. All Nicaraguans are equal before the law. There are no privileges by reason of birth, nobility, race or social condition. Art. 110. Communications by letter, telegraph, telephone, or otherwise, and private documents and papers are inviolable and they may not be opened, intercepted or searched except in conformance with laws dictated for reasons of general interest, and in such case the search must take place in the presence of the addressee or possessor, or, in his absence, in that of two witnesses, and correspondence, documents, or papers which have no relation to the inquiry shall be returned.
Art. 111. The enumeration of rights, duties, and guarantees made by the Constitution does not exclude others which are inherent in the human personality or which derive from the republican form of government.
TITLE V
LEGISLATIVE POWER

Chapter I Its Constitution and Attributes Art. 112. The legislative power is exercised by a Congress composed of two chambers: the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. Art. 113. The Congress shall meet regularly without call on the fifteenth day of April of each year in the capital of the Republic and shall conduct sessions for sixty days. That period of sessions may be prolonged up to thirty days more, by resolution of both chambers or at the request of the executive power. The days on which no session is held shall not be counted in the computation. Art. 114. Upon summons by the executive power and at the date set thereby, the Congress shall meet in special sessions to consider exclusively the matters submitted to it by the executive power and to close on the date indicated thereby. It shall also meet in special sessions upon agreement to that effect by fifteen of its members, who shall issue the summons personally or through the president of the Congress. In such sessions the Congress may consider only the matters specified in the summons. Art. 115. If for any reason Congress is unable to meet on the dates indicated, it shall do so as soon as possible. Art. 116. The chambers shall open and close their sessions simultaneously. Neither of them may suspend the sessions for more than three days without the consent of the other. Art. 117. The President of the Republic, in person or by means of the Minister of Government, will be present at the opening of the regular sessions of Congress and, at a joint session, will present a message on the acts of his administration. This ceremony is not essential for Congress to exercise legitimately its functions. Art. 118. A quorum of each of the chambers in order to conduct sessions shall be formed by the absolute majority of the total number of its members, and that of the full Congress by the presence of the absolute majority of each of the chambers. f Art. 119. Decisions shall be made by the vote of the absolute majority of those present; but when any other kind of majority is required, it must be computed on the basis of the total membership of the respective chamber or of the Congress. For this purpose, as well as for the determination of a quorum, senators for life who are not present at the session shall not be counted. Art. 120. Five days before the date fixed for their regular installation, the chambers shall follow a preparatory process, subject to the formalities determined by their respective regulations. Art. 121. If Congress is not installed on the fixed day for lack of a quorum in either of the chambers or in both, the representatives present,

in a preparatory meeting, shall apply to the absentees the penalties established by their respective regulations, and the sessions shall be opened when the required number is complete. Art. 122. In case of the temporary or permanent absence of a member of Congress, he shall be replaced by the respective alternate, and the latter by another alternate appointed by the president of his chamber, subject to the formalities prescribed by the regulations. Art. 123. Every meeting of members of Congress held without compliance with the constitutional conditions, for the purpose of exercising the legislative power, shall be illegal. Acts so issued shall be null, and the representatives taking part in these deliberations will be committing an offense. Art. 124. The following may not be elected members of the legislative power: (1) Those who hold an office under appointment by the executive sixty days previous to the election; (2) Officials of the judicial order; (3) Relatives of the President of the Republic within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity; (4) Those who administer or have administered and collected public funds, and who have not settled their accounts; (5) Those who are suspended from their rights of citizenship. Art. 125. The deputies and senators from the time of their election shall enjoy the following prerogatives: (1) Personal immunity against being accused or judged for common or official crimes, except in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution; (2) Exemptions from military service unless with their consent; (3) Exemptions from being civilly sued from thirty days before the regular sessions of Congress, or from the order of convocation of special sessions, until fifteen days after either. If the judgments were already pending their terms will not run during the sessions. This provision does not deprive representatives of the right to bring suit and, if they see fit, to carry on proceedings which had been started; (4) Exemption from being confined and from being deprived of their liberty for any reason, even during the suspension of the constitutional guarantees, unless grounds are declared to exist for their prosecution; (5) Exemption from responsibility for their opinions and votes in the exercise of their offices. Art. 126. The deputies and senators shall be compensated with a monthly remuneration. Art. 127. The armed forces may not enter either chamber or the Congress unless called in by the directing board. Whenever armed forces do arrive, they shall be subject to the orders of the respective president. Art. 128. The sessions of the chambers and of the full Congress shall be public, with the limitations established by their regulations. Art. 129. No deputy or senator from the moment of his election, and no alternate actually serving, may be appointed or elected to any public employment or office paid for with fiscal or municipal funds. This provision is not applicable in case of war, nor does it apply to the offices of President of the Republic, ministers or undersecretaries of state, or members of the National District. The deputy or senator, other than
a senator for life, appointed or elected to any of these posts shall be suspended in his functions of representative for the duration of the office. Excepted from the incompatibility set forth in this article are the following offices: professors, members of the directive boards of the faculty schools, boards of charity, commissions of codification or amendment of the laws, the delegations of Nicaragua to international or scientific conferences, tribunals of international arbitration, directors or physicians of hospitals, diplomats or consuls, arbitrators and attorneys or counselors of any branch of the executive and of the State institutions. The deputy or senator who occupies an office other than those hereinbefore enumerated shall incur the legal penalties and his appointment shall be invalid unless he shall have previously renounced his representative capacity. Art. 130. A senator or deputy who leaves the country for more than a year without the permission of the chamber to which he belongs shall lose his office unless he is discharging outside the Republic some office that is compatible with his legislative functions. Art. 131. Deputies and senators may not personally or by means of another person execute any documents for the government or act as advocate or attorney against the State. Those who are agents of persons or companies, national or foreign, shall have no voice or vote in the debates concerning the interests they represent. Art. 132. The following prerogatives belong to each of the chambers without the intervention of the other: (1) To arrange the order of its sessions and everything concerning its internal regulation; (2) To create and provide the necessary offices for its work; (3) To enforce the attendance of its members; (4) To order the filling by election of vacancies produced by the absence of regular and alternate members, unless such vacancies occur during the last six months of the period and the filling thereof is not urgent; (5) To request of the executive a statement of the income and expenses of all or any of the accounts and a report on any branch of the administration; (6) To invite the other chamber to deliberate jointly; (7) To appoint commissions to represent it in official acts; (8) To accept resignations presented by any of its members; (9) To order the payment of salaries to representatives who are obliged by grave illness to retire from the chambers for an indefinite time. Art. 133. The following attributes belong to the legislative power divided into separate chambers: (1) To enact, amend, interpret and repeal the laws; (2) To create and suppress offices and determine their compensation; (3) To make the necessary provisions for the maintenance of the independence and security of the Republic; (4) To change the residence of the supreme national powers or any of them in extraordinary circumstances and for grave reasons of public necessity; (5) To declare, when the abnormal circumstances of the country so require, a general state of economic emergency, fixing the duration thereof. Such declaration shall, according to its terms, suspend some or all of the constitutional guarantees provided for in Articles 77 and 107, exclusively for objects of general relief. The laws enacted in virtue of this declaration by the legislative power, or, if it is in recess, by the executive power, cannot remain in force in disregard of the said constitutional guarantees for longer than the time fixed by Congress.

Emergency decrees enacted by the executive power shall be approved by the council of ministers and submitted to the legislative power within the first fifteen days of its next regular session for approval or disapproval by absolute majority; (6) To enact, for a period of not more than one year, subject to extension as often as may be necessary, temporary leasehold laws restricting the freedom of contract; (7) To approve or reject treaties concluded with foreign nations. The treaties referred to in Article 3 need for their approval two-thirds of the votes; (8) To establish the national revenues and fix the expenses of the administration. In each legislature the general budget of both shall be voted; (9) To indicate the functions of the employees of the Republic and to limit the territorial jurisdictions in which they should act; (10) To impose taxes; (11) To recognize the national debt and arrange its service; (12) To fix the conditions of the national money and the system of weights and measures; (13) To declare war or authorize the executive to do so; (14) To authorize the sending of national troops outside of Nicaragua. In the case of war or of international controversy the executive power shall have this power; (15) To approve, modify, or disapprove contracts concluded by the executive concerning loans, colonization, navigation, and other works of general utility which involve privileges for limited periods, permitted by the Constitution, or pledge or dispose of the property of the nation, or dispose of sums not voted in the budget; (16) To concede or deny permission to Nicaraguans to accept offices of foreign countries when they must exercise them in Nicaragua. This permission is not necessary when it concerns countries of Central America; (17) To authorize the foundation of banks of issue and the establishment of gratuity funds for widows and orphans; (18) To decree the shield of arms, the flag of the Republic, and the national anthem; (19) To approve or disapprove the decrees issued by the executive power; (20) To legalize the extraordinary or supplementary credits accorded by the President of the Republic in the council of ministers; (21) To concede amnesty and pardons for political offenses. In no case may a pardon include the civil responsibility of the person favored in his relations with individuals; (22) To grant commutation of the death penalty for the one immediately below it; (23) To open or close ports; create, transfer or abolish customhouses; or prescribe the rules to be observed by the executive in doing so; (24) To order the extension of its sessions in the cases mentioned in Article 113.

Art. 134.

The following attributes also belong to Congress divided

into separate chambers when the initiative is taken by the executive power: (1) To decree rewards, indemnifications, pensions, prizes, or honors, without prejudice to the powers which the President of the Republic has directly as chief of the armed forces; (2) To decree prizes and grant privileges for limited periods, permitted by the Constitution, to the authors or inventors of works of general utility and to those who have introduced new industries or improved existing ones; (3) To award grants and prizes for objects of public utility which tend to establish new industries or develop agriculture;

(4) To decree the alienation or lease of public property and its application to public uses or authorize the executive to do so on proper bases. The public revenues and taxes may not be alienated; (5) To confer the grade of general of a division; (6) To concede indulgences, reductions or commutations of penalties for common offenses, after forwarding the report to the Supreme Court of Justice; (7) To grant permission to the President of the Republic to leave the country. Art. 135. The legislative powers may not be delegated, except those of legislating in the branches of public works, police, hygiene, war, charity, public education, and the treasury, which may be delegated to the executive power to exercise during recesses of Congress. The delegated power to legislate regarding the treasury does not include that of creating taxes, or of modifying parts of the general budget of expenses. The legislative power may also delegate the faculty of receiving the constitutional oath from the officials it elects or declares elected. Chapter II The Chamber of Deputies Art. 136. The Chamber of Deputies is composed of the representatives elected by direct popular vote. Art. 137. The departments established by law shall elect one deputy and one substitute for each thirty thousand inhabitants; but if in this computation, a department has an excess of population greater than fifteen thousand inhabitants, it shall have the right to elect one additional deputy. There shall always be one deputy for each department, even though its population may be less than that mentioned in the preceding paragraph. The general census of the Republic shall serve as a basis for fixing the number of deputies. Art. 138. In order to be elected deputy it is necessary to be a native of Nicaragua, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of the secular state, and over twenty-five years of age. Art. 139. The deputies shall remain in office for six years. Art. 140. It is the province of the Chamber of Deputies to examine the charges or accusations presented against the President of the Republic, deputies, senators, magistrates of the courts of justice, the president and members of the national council of elections, ministers and undersecretaries of state, diplomatic agents and the president of the tribunal of the council, and, if they merit attention, to lay the accusations before the Senate. The responsibilities of the said officials cease one year after the termination of their offices, as regards their official offenses. During that time charges or accusations relating to those offenses must be considered exclusively by the Chamber of Deputies. Chapter III Chamber of the Senate Art. 141. The Chamber of the Senate is composed of fifteen senators, with their respective alternates, directly elected by the people in a single

electoral district, and of the ex-Presidents of the Republic who have exercised the presidency by direct popular election. Art. 142. In order to be elected senator it is necessary to be a native of Nicaragua, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of the secular state and over forty years of age. Art. 143. The senators by popular election shall remain in office six years. Art. 144. The ex-Presidents of the Republic who have served as President by direct popular election shall be ipso facto senators for life and are not subject to the incompatibilities of Article 129. In no case may senators for life vote on matters related to any other office they may hold. Art. 145. It is the province of the Senate to take cognizance of the accusations presented by the Chamber of Deputies against the high officials referred to in Article 140, subject to hearing the accused. If the latter does not appear, he shall be judged by default. Art. 146. When the Senate judges the high officials accused by the Chamber of Deputies the following rules will be observed: (1) If the accusation refers to offenses committed in the exercise of their functions, and the Senate, as trier of the facts, accepts it, it will impose as a penalty the loss of office, when appropriate, and the inability to obtain other public charges for a time determined by law, without prejudice to the possibility of continuing criminal proceedings against the prisoner before the Supreme Court of Justice, if the acts for which he is held responsible merit another penalty; (2) If the accusation refers to common offenses, the Senate shall limit itself to declaring whether there are or are not grounds for prosecution and, in the affirmative case, shall place the accused at the disposition of the Supreme Court of Justice, which shall decide as trier of the facts as to his guilt and shall apply an appropriate penalty in case of conviction; if he is absolved, the official shall return to the exercise of his duties. Chapter IV The Full Congress Art. 147. The full Congress shall be presided over in alternating order by the presidents of the chambers. Art. 148. The Congress in joint session is competent: (1) To regulate the order of its sessions and all that concerns its internal r6gime; (2) To proclaim the election of the President of the Republic in accordance with the certification of the respective return filed by the national council of elections; (3) To elect from its membership, in the last regular or special session, three Designates to substitute for the President of the Republic in case of his absolute or temporary default. The Board of managers will send to the President of the Republic the list of the Designates so that he may indicate at the foot thereof, with his signature and seal, the order of their being called, and may keep it in his possession; (4) To elect one of its members to act as President of the Republic when the absolute or temporary default of the President occurs during the regular or special sessions of the Congress or in the cases mentioned in paragraph 2 of Article 175 and paragraph 2 of Article 176;

 
(5) To elect the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and the superior judge of labor, with their respective alternates; (6) To accept the resignations of the President of the Republic, elected or acting, the Designates, the magistrates of the courts of justice, and the superior judge of labor or his alternate; (7) To receive the constitutional oath from the officials it elects or declares elected; (8) To take cognizance of vetoes of the executive power; (9) To ratify the amendments referred to in Article 287; (10) To take cognizance of the report presented by the executive power concerning the measures taken during the period of suspension of the constitutional guarantees. Chapter V Formation, Sanction and Promulgation of the Laws

Art. 149. The right of initiative in the formation of the laws and legislative resolutions belongs to the deputies and the executive power; and, in matters concerning them, to the Supreme Court of Justice and the national council of elections. A proposal shall be presented to the Chamber of Deputies and, if the Chamber decides to consider it, referred to a committee for a report and submitted for first and second reading in separate sessions. If it is disapproved on the final reading, it shall be deemed to have been rejected. Art. 150. A proposal approved in the Chamber of Deputies shall immediately pass to the Senate for discussion. If the Senate approves it on first and second reading, in separate sessions, it shall pass to the executive; if the Senate disapproves it on first reading, it shall be deemed to have been rejected. Art. 151. A proposal added to or amended by the Senate shall be returned to the Chamber of Deputies for reconsideration of the additions these are approved, it shall return and revisions on a single reading, and if to the Senate to be sent to the executive power. Art. 152. If the additions or revisions are not approved by the Chamber of Deputies, the proposal shall be returned to the Senate. If the latter insists on maintaining them by a majority of two-thirds of the votes, the proposal shall be considered rejected. If the revisions or amendments do not obtain this majority, the proposal shall return to the Chamber of Deputies. If the latter confirms the original proposal by two-thirds of the votes, it shall be considered approved; lacking such a majority, it shall be considered rejected. For the votes mentioned in this article, a single reading shall be sufficient. Art. 153. Whenever one chamber desires to express to the other its judgment on any legislative matter, it shall do so through a committee which shall have the right to participate in the debates that may arise concerning the matter. In case of disagreement between the two chambers, mixed commissions may be designated, composed of three deputies and two senators appointed by their respective chambers, in order to propose the form and method of resolving the differences. Art. 154. In the original instruments which Congress sends to the executive power, the following formula shall be used: "The Chamber of Deputies and that of the Senate of the Republic of Nicaragua decree, resolve or declare" (insert what is decreed, resolved, or declared). Given in the Hall of Sessions of Congress" (when in joint chambers), place and date. The signatures of the president and secretaries of Congress will follow. When in separate chambers: "Given in the Hall of Sessions of the Chamber of Deputies," place and date (followed by the signatures of the president and the secretaries of the Chamber of Deputies). "To the Executive Power. Chamber of the Senate," place and date. The signatures of the president and secretaries of the Chamber of the Senate follow. Art. 155. Every original instrument shall be sent to the executive power by the Senate, within three days of being voted, in order that he may give his sanction and publish it as a law within ten days of receiving it. Within the same time there shall be passed to the executive power the resolutions or declarations of the Congress in joint chambers or in separate chambers, in order that they may be immediately published. Art. 156. If the President of the Republic, in council of ministers, finds it inexpedient to sanction a bill, he must return it to Congress by means of the Senate within ten days of receiving it, giving the reasons for the veto. If in the given time he expresses no objections it shall be held as sanctioned and must be published as law. Art. 157. When the Senate receives a vetoed project of law, it shall immediately propose a meeting of Congress in joint session to consider the veto. If Congress ratifies the project by two-thirds of the votes, it shall again be sent to the Executive with this formula: "Ratified constitutionally," and the executive power shall cause it to be published without delay. Art. 158. If the President of the Republic does not promulgate the law or any other act of Congress within the ten days, it shall be promulgated by the president of Congress and he shall cause it to be published. Art. 159. Drafts of codes may be submitted as a whole for approval after the issuance of a report by a committee of each chamber composed of five members. Art. 160. When the executive power receives the signed original of a law within the last ten days of the sessions of Congress or later, the power of veto is reserved to him to exercise during the first ten days of the next ordinary sessions. Art. 161. When the executive power submits an urgent proposal to Congress, each chamber must pronounce on it within a period of five days. Art. 162. The second reading of any proposal may be dispensed with when so ordered by a majority of two-thirds of the votes of the chamber. Art. 163. Matters which are still pending in the legislature may be introduced only in the succeeding legislature if they have been the subject of a full debate in either of the chambers or if they were awaiting an opinion from the Supreme Court of Justice and a period fixed therefor by the chamber had not expired. Proposals rejected in one legislature may be brought forward again only in the following legislature. Art. 164. The sanction of the executive power is not required for: (1) The law of the budget; (2) Decrees, resolutions or declarations given by the united chambers; (3) Resolutions of the chambers under Articles 140 and 146; (4) Regulations issued by the chambers for their internal regulation; for suspending or prolonging their sessions.
(5) Dispositions for installation or closure, for moving to another place and

Art. 165. Whenever a provision of law, which does not proceed from the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice, has for its object the enactment, amendment or repeal of dispositions referring to judicial matters, it may not be discussed without hearing the opinion of that tribunal, which the latter will issue within the period fixed by the Chamber of Deputies with due regard for the extent, importance, or urgency of the proposal, provided that this period may not be less than fifteen days. After this period of time, discussion of the project may be proceeded to even without the opinion of the Supreme Tribunal.
TITLE VI THE EXECUTIVE POWER

Chapter I Organizations Art. 166. The exercise of the executive functions of the government is entrusted to the President of the Republic who shall act with his ministers, individually or in council, except in regard to those matters in which by their nature he may act alone. Art. 167. The President of the Republic is elected by direct popular vote. Art. 168. The qualifications for election as President of the Republic are the following: To have been born in Nicaragua of a Nicaraguan father or mother; to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, more than thirty years of age, and of the secular state; and not to have renounced his citizenship at any time. Art. 169. The term of the President of the Republic is six years and shall commence and end on the first of May; on that day the retiring President of the Republic shall surrender his office to the president of the Congress, and the latter shall give possession of the same to the incoming President or in his absence to the person called as his substitute. If for any reason the retiring President does not appear to surrender his office, the president of the Congress shall give possession to the President-elect or his substitute. Art. 170. In case of the permanent default of the President his term of office shall be completed by the Designate called as his substitute. Art. 171. A President elected by direct popular vote may not be reelected for the next succeeding term. Nor may any of the following be elected President of the Republic: (1) A relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity of the President of the Republic or of the person acting as President during any part of the last six months preceding the election;
(2) A soldier who was in active service sixty days before the election;

(3) Ministers of state who do not surrender their office sixty days before
the election.

Art. 172. The President of the Republic may leave the country without permission of Congress if he transfers the duties of the President to the person designated by the Constitution as his substitute. If his absence exceeds three months he shall ipso facto lose his office unless he has permission from Congress. To leave the country while exercising his office

he will require the permission of Congress and this may not exceed a period of three months. In no case may the President of the Republic leave the country when an accusation is pending against him before the Senate. Nor may ex-Presidents leave under the same circumstances. Art. 173. The President-elect shall take possession before the full Congress, in solemn session, and take the oath in these terms: I solemnly promise by my honor to discharge loyally the office of President of the Republic that the people have confided to me; to defend the integrity and independence of the Nation and to fulfill and enforce the fulfillment of the Constitution and the laws of the Republic. Art. 174. The President of the Republic shall answer for his acts before the National Congress and shall enjoy the immunities and privileges referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, and 4 of Article 125. Art. 175. In case of permanent or temporary absence of the President of the Republic his duties shall be performed by the respective Designates in the order of call; but if Congress is in regular or special session, it shall elect one of its members to act as President. The citizen so elected shall complete the presidential term if the absence of the President is permanent. When the President of the Republic has not fixed the order of call of the Designates, the presidency shall be assumed by the president of Congress and he shall immediately call a special session to enable Congress to make a definite election of the successor. Art. 176. The President of the Republic shall cease to serve as such on the day on which his term ends. In case of temporary or permanent absence or indefinitely continuing illness of the President elected, the new Congress shall elect from its membership the person who shall temporarily or, if necessary, definitively fill the post from the first of May to the end of the term. Chapter II Duties and Attributes of the Executive Power Art. 177. To the President of the Republic are confided the government and administration of the State and the supreme command of all the armed forces of the nation. His authority extends to everything that has for its object the conservation of the internal public order and the external security of the Republic. Art. 178. The following powers and duties belong to the President in relation to the legislative power: (1) To be present at the opening of the ordinary sessions of Congress and to present to it a message on the acts of his administration; (2) To convoke the legislative power to special sessions by reason of public necessity; (3) To send to the Chamber of Deputies within the first fifteen days of its sessions the draft of the general budget of income and expenses; (4) To present by means of the respective ministers and through the Chamber of Deputies, within one month of the installation of Congress, the annual memorandum or bulletin of each branch of the administration; (5) To give to the chambers by means of the corresponding minister, the information they solicit, except when the matters require secrecy; (6) To present, by means of the ministers of state, initiatives of laws;

Constitutions of Nations (7) To veto legislative acts., or sanction and publish them in accordance with the Constitution; (8) To publish within five days the legislative dispositions which do not require the sanction of the executive; (9) To order the filling of vacancies of senators or deputies within one month of their occurrence, except when they become known in the last six months of the respective term and there is no urgency in the matter; (10) To issue, during the recess of Congress, decree-laws pursuant to legislative delegation of power, or in cases of urgency and public necessity. In the last cases, the decree-laws must be submitted to Congress in the first fifteen days of its next regular sessions; (11) To take care that Congress meets on the day fixed by the Constitution, ordering in time the necessary dispositions; (12) To propose pardons, reductions, or commutations of penalties.

Art. 179. The formula which shall be used for the publication of laws is the following: "The President of the Republic, to its inhabitants, Know Ye that the Congress has ordered the following: (here the text and signature). Therefore, Let it be executed." The formula to be used for the publication of legislative acts which do not require executive sanction shall be the following: "The President of the Republic, to its inhabitants, Know Ye: That the Congress has ordered the following: (here the text and signature). Therefore, Let it be published." Art. 180. The following powers belong to the President in relation to the judicial power: (1) To observe the official conduct of the members of the judicial power and, for this purpose, to request the Supreme Court, if appropriate, to restrain, according to the law, acts contrary to the correct discharge of duty, or to ask the public ministry, if there be sufficient merit, to draw up appropriate accusation or demand disciplinary measures by the competent tribunal; (2) To give the judicial officers the aid they need to make effective their decisions and orders; (3) To concede, in recess of Congress, amnesties and pardons for political offenses. In no case may the indulgences include the civil responsibilities of those favored in relation to private persons. He may not exercise this function in regard to his ministers and undersecretaries of state; (4) To suspend, if he finds it desirable, the execution of the penalty of death, when the prisoner or his representative solicits it, provided that the request is accompanied by a copy of the petition to be made by them to Congress for commutation of the penalty; (5) To see to the full payment of the budget of the judicial power. Art. 181. The following powers and duties belong to the President of the Republic in relation to the armed forces: (1) To command the military forces and organize, distribute, and dispose of them in conformity with the law; (2) To direct the operations of war as supreme commander; (3) To grant to soldiers disabled in the service the pensions to which they are entitled; (4) To grant retirement to servicemen in conformity with the law; (5) To concede honors and rewards to servicemen wlo have distinguished themselves in the service; (6) To confer military grades in time of peace up to that of brigadier general, inclusive, and in campaign up to that of general of division, giving account of this last to Congress for its approval or disapproval;

(7) To initiate steps in time of peace for the conferring of the rank of general of division on the soldier who in his judgment merits it. Art. 182. The President of the Republic as supreme administrative authority is competent: (1) To defend the independence and honor of the nation and the integrity of its territory; (2) To fulfill and cause to be fulfilled the Constitution and laws (3) To regulate the laws without transgressing them or distorting them and, with this same restriction, to issue pertinent decrees, resolutions, and instructions; (4) Freely to appoint and remove the ministers and undersecretaries of state and the other officials subject to appointment by him under the law; (5) To conduct the foreign relations, appoint the diplomatic agents and consuls of the Republic, receive the diplomatic agents and recognize the consuls of other nations; (6) To declare war with the authorization of Congress or to do so without awaiting it when it is necessary to repel a foreign aggression; (7) To enter into treaties and any other diplomatic agreements and to - ratify them, upon approval of the legislative power; (8) To permit or refuse the transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic; (9) To enforce the collection of the revenues of the State and see that they are applied subject to the law; (10) To grant letters of naturalization; (11) To exercise in accordance with law due inspection over banks and other credit establishments; (12) To direct, regulate, and inspect public education, spread popular education and combat illiteracy; (13) To guard the national money; (14) To maintain the uniformity of weights and measures; (15) To conclude contracts in accordance with the laws for the rendering of service and the execution of public works and for purposes of general interest; (16) To grant patents, to guarantee literary property and property in useful inventions or discoveries in accordance with the law; (17) To indicate, during the recess of Congress, the place to which. the powers of the State should be temporarily removed, when there is grave reason for this; (18) To rehabilitate, in accordance with the law, those citizens who are suspended in the exercise of their rights; (19) During the recess of Congress, to open and close ports, to establish maritime and territorial customs; (20) To provide for the national ownership and registration of vessels; (21) To prescribe the regulation of his powers; (22) To exercise the right of inspection and supervision over institutions of public utility in order that their property and revenues may be conserved and properly applied and in order that the will of their founders may be fulfilled in all essential respects; (23) To grant, on the basis of merit, the decorations, medals, diplomas and prizes established by law; (24) To promote immigration; (25) To grant furloughs and pensions; (26) To exercise the other functions of government and administration which the laws entrust to him. Art. 183. When in the judgment of the President of the Republic the public tranquility is menaced, he may issue orders of detention against

those presumed responsible, interrogate them and hold them for a period up to fifteen days, at the end of which he must place them either at liberty or at the order of competent judges; but if in the judgment of the Chief of State it is necessary to confine in the interior of the Republic those suspected, he may in the council of ministers order their confinement. Those detained may not be quartered with common criminals. Art. 184. When the Republic is involved in an international or civil war, or there is danger that one or the other may occur; or in case of epidemic, earthquake, or any other public calamity; or when in any other circumstances it is necessary for the defense, peace or security of the nation or of its institutions or form of government, the President of the Republic in the council of ministers may, by decree, restrict or suspend in all or part of the national territory the exercise of the constitutional guarantees, with the exception in all cases of those relative to: (1) The inviolability of human life; (2) The prohibition of trial by judges not designated by law; (3) The prohibition of the application of torture and infamous penalties; (4) The prohibition of issuing retroactive or confiscatory laws; and (5) That of decreeing taxes. As regards contributions, if international or civil war has broken out, the President in the council of ministers may decree those of a general character. The decree of suspension or restriction of guarantees shall set forth: (a) The reasons which justify it; (b) The determination of the guarantee or guarantees which are restricted or suspended, and (c) The territory which will be affected by the suspension or restriction. Neither the suspension nor the restriction of guarantees shall in any way. affect the functioning of the public powers of the nation, and its members shall enjoy always the prerogatives conceded by the law. The President of the Republic and the ministers of state shall be responsible when they declare suspended or restricted the constitutional order without the occurrence of events that justify it, and they shall be, as well as other officials, responsible for whatever abuse they commit in the exercise of the faculties conceded in this article. In case of foreign war, the executive shall convoke Congress in the same decree in which he restricts or suspends the exercise of the constitutional guarantees, to meet within the thirty days following; and if it is not convoked, Congress may meet by its own right. This decree of suspension of guarantees will be dissolved upon cessation of the causes therefore and the executive power must without delay give account of his action to Congress. Chapter III Ministers of State Art. 185. For the dispatch of business belonging to the executive power there shall be ministers of state. The law will determine their

number and names and the departments of the administration corresponding to each one. Art. 186. The ministers of state shall have in their charge, under the authority of the President of the Republic, the direction and carrying out of the public services assigned to the respective administrative departments; and they must have the following qualifications: to be citizens in the exercise of their rights, natives of Nicaragua, over twenty-five years of age, and not to have been condemned to a severe penalty. Art. 187. The decrees, orders and dispositions of the President of the Republic must be countersigned by the ministers of state of the respective branches with the exception of orders that relate to the appointment or removal of ministers and undersecretaries of state. Art. 188. Each minister of state shall be personally responsible for the acts which he signs or authorizes and jointly responsible for those to which he subscribes or agrees with the President of the Republic and with the other ministers of state. The lack of the signature of the President does not invalidate an act, but the minister or ministers shall be guilty of President denies having given the order for the act. The signature forgery When if the or signatures lacking is or are that or those of a minister or ministers, the order or decree shall be invalid; and if the lack was the result of negligence, the official or officials responsible shall make amends for the damages caused by the omission. Art. 189. The ministers of state, within one month of the installation of Congress, shall give account in printed reports of what they have done and think it necessary to do in their respective branches. They shall also present accounts of the funds they have managed. Art. 190. The ministers of state shall give to Congress the information which is asked of them relative to the business of their branches. To give this information they may require a secret session when secrecy is necessary in the matter of which it treats. Art. 191. The ministers of state have the right to speak in the chambers and are obliged to attend when they are called upon for information. Art. 192. The ministers of state, in meeting presided over by the chief of the executive power, form the council of ministers. Its organization and functions are determined by the Constitution and the laws. Art. 193. The following may not be ministers of state: (1) Contractors for public works and services; (2) Those who as results of contracts for such works and services have personal claims against the public treasury; (3) Those who have collected or administered public funds without having settled their accounts; (4) Debtors to the public treasury; (5) Relatives of the President of the Republic, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity. Art. 194. There shall be the number of undersecretaries of state determined by law. Art. 195. The undersecretaries of states shall have the same qualifications as the ministers. They shall collaborate in the respective offices under the ministers of state and take the places of the latter in their absence.

THE JUDICIAL POWER

Sole Chapter

Its Organization and Attributes Art. 196. Justice is administered in the name of the Republic by the judicial power, which shall be exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice, the courts of appeals and the judges and other officials prescribed by the Constitution and the laws. Art. 197. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have its seat in the capital of the Republic. Art. 198. There shall be courts of appeals with residence in the cities of Le6n, Granada, Matagalpa, Bluefields, and Masaya. Upon the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Congress may, by vote of a majority of two-thirds, reduce the number of courts of appeals or create other new ones. Art. 199. There shall be district courts in the chief cities of the departments and in those cities where they have already been established; and local courts in the towns which have a municipality. There shall also be a superior judge of labor and an alternate in the places determined by law. Upon the initiative of the Supreme Court of Justice, district courts may be established or abolished by law in cities which are not departmental capitals, and local courts in towns which lack a municipality. Art. 200. The Supreme Court shall be composed of seven magistrates; five in their own right and two alternates. Art. 201. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice must be men above the age of forty years, born in Nicaragua of Nicaraguan father or mother, of secular status, citizens in the exercise of their rights, and lawyers of well-known learning and integrity who have practised their profession creditably for more than ten years or have been magistrates. Art. 202. The magistrates of the courts of appeals must be men above the age of thirty years who have practised the profession of advocate creditably for more than five years or filled the post of district judge and who have the other qualifications required of magistrates of the Supreme Court. Art. 203. The courts of appeals of Le6n, Masaya, and Granada shall be composed of six magistrates, three for the civil chamber and three for the criminal; and those of Matagalpa and Bluefields shall be composed of five magistrates, two for each chamber and a president for both. Congress may increase the number of magistrates of the courts of appeals when it is necessary for the proper conduct of the administration of justice. Art. 204. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the courts of appeals, and the superior judge of labor and his alternate shall be elected by the National Congress and shall begin their terms on the twentieth of April. Art. 205. The district and local judges and the labor judges shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 206. The district judges must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over twenty-one years of age, advocates of well-known integrity

who have practised the profession of advocate for more than two years, or have filled the post of judge or clerk of a court. Art. 207. The superior judge of labor, who shall have the same qualifications as those required to be a magistrate of a court of appeals, may set up a tribunal including representatives of employers and workers in the manner prescribed by law. Art. 208. The term of the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be six years; that of the magistrates of the courts of appeals four years, that of the district judges and the superior judge of labor two years, and that of the local judges and the other labor judges one year. They may be elected or re-appointed for successive periods. Art. 209. The magistrates of the courts of justice and the superior judge of labor shall enjoy the same immunities and prerogatives as the representatives in Congress, excepting those enumerated in numbers (3) and (5) of Article 125. Art. 210. Persons linked by relationship of consanguinity within the fourth grade or of affinity within the second degree may not be magistrates or judges of the same tribunal. If two or more relatives of this grade should be elected, the lawyer of the most recent title shall be rejected. Art. 211. The members of the judicial power may not discharge any office of election by Congress or of appointment by the executive power or by any other administrative authority or corporation. Excepted from this disposition are the offices of professors and those of members of the boards of directors of faculty schools and of commissions for the codification or amendment of laws. The acceptance of an appointment prohibited by this article involves the loss of the judicial office. Art. 212. The president of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be the president of the judicial power of the Republic. His annual appointment belongs to the Supreme Court. Art. 213. The following powers belong to the Supreme Court of Justice as well as those already expressed: (1) To provide its internal regulations and approve those of the courts of appeals'; (2) To appoint and freely remove the employees of its immediate dependency; (3) To exercise the directive, correctional, and economic supervision of all the tribunals and courts of the nation; (4) To appoint public registrars, court doctors and other officials or employees determined by the law; (5) To give possession, either itself or by delegation, to all officials and employees of its appointment; (6) To accept the resignation of the officials and employees appointed by it and to remove them by unanimous vote for cause before the expiration of their respective terms; (7) To grant annual leaves to magistrates, judges, public registrars, and court doctors, with the enjoyment of a salary up to one month. For justifiable reason, leave with the privilege of salary may be extended up to three months. The Supreme Court may also grant leave without pay for the period fixed by law; (8) To draw up annually with due anticipation the draft of the budget of the judicial power;

(9) To suspend and rehabilitate, in accordance with the law, advocates, notaries and judicial prosecutors; (10) To have exclusive cognizance, as a jury, of the official and common crimes of the high officials who enjoy immunity when the Chamber of the Senate lodges accusations against the accused or declares there are grounds for prosecution; (11) To hear the recourses of cassation, amparo, revision and others indicated by the law; (12) To hear actions against the resolutions of the tribunal of accounts, and resolve the conflicts between that tribunal and other agencies of the State; (13) To hear prize cases; (14) To hear controversies involving the diplomatic agents accredited to the government of the nation, in the cases provided for in international law; (15) To grant the extradition of criminals required by other nations and the recognition of foreign sentences; (16) To hear appeals against the orders of those in charge of the administration of the National District, mayors, municipalities, or local administrative corporations, when they are contrary to the Constitution or the laws; (17) To decide definitively, after hearing the Public Ministry, on the legal validity of the legislative acts which the executive vetoes as unconstitutional or submits to the Supreme Court for a declaration regarding their constitutionality; (18) To attend the Congress, by means of its president or another of the magistrates, to take part in the discussion of the bills which it presents or which have for their object the issue, amendment or repeal of civil, penal, commercial, mining or procedural codes, or any other bill relating to judicial matters; (19) To give rulings or information in cases determined by the Constitution and laws: (20) Fo exercise the other attributes and functions which the law may indicate. Art. 214. The power of judging and of executing the judgment belongs exclusively to the tribunals of justice. Art. 215. The administration of justice in the Republic is free, and shall be subject to no burden other than stamps and the tax on stamped paper. Art. 216. In no proceeding shall there be more than two stages. The judge who has exercised jurisdiction in one may not do so in the other, nor in cassation. Art. 217. The tribunals and judges of the Republic shall apply in preference: (1) The Constitution and fundamental laws; (2) The laws and decree-laws; (3) The executive decrees and orders. In no case may they apply amendments made or resolutions or dispositions given by written communication. When in a final decision from which, under the law, there is no recourse in any way to the Supreme Court of Justice, a judge or tribunal declares on any point in controversy that a law is inapplicable on the ground of unconstitutionality, the opinion on this point shall be referred to the Supreme Court of Justice for its advice. Art. 218. The members of the judicial power shall be retired in accordance with law.

Art. 219. The hearings of the tribunals and courts are public except in special cases indicated by law and when publicity would be against order and good custom. Art. 220. The judges are independent in the exercise of their functions. They shall be subject only to the Constitution and the laws. Art. 221. The organization, attributes, jurisdiction, and competence of the tribunals of the Republic shall be fixed by law. Art. 222. The officials of the judicial order shall have their residence where they exercise their functions. Violation of this provision is punishable by removal from office by resolution of the Congress in separate chambers at the instance of the public ministry.
TITLE VIII
PUBLIC FINANCE

Chapter I National Property Art. 223. The following form the treasury of the nation: (a) Its movable and immovable property; (b) Its active credits; (c) The taxes, contributions, and other public charges paid by the inhabitants of the Republic; (d) The income which the State realizes under any other title. Art. 224. Lands, forests, waters, and in general all property of public utility belong to the State without prejudice to rights lawfully acquired by other persons, natural or juridical. The law shall prescribe the conditions for the utilization thereof by the State and for the concession thereof to private individuals in fee or under any other title. Art. 225. The riches of the subsoil belong to the State. The working thereof shall not be conceded to private individuals except on the basis of a share in the profits. Stone for building or for ornamental purposes, pozzuolana, sand, slate, clay, lime, and other materials used as a rule for building shall be exceptions to this rule. Art. 226. The properties of the State are imprescriptible. Art. 227. The administration of the State property, in the absence of legal provision to the contrary, is vested in the Department of Finance and Public Credit; as well as the consideration and decision of all matters relating to contracts or operations with respect to the said property. Art. 228. The executive must be authorized by law to dispose of State real property and to borrow on the credit of the nation. Any act in violation of this rule is absolutely void. Art. 229. Contracts for public works involving large amounts shall be awarded by public auction. The law shall lay down regulations respecting this. Art. 230. The State guarantees the payment of the public debt contracted in conformity with the Constitution and the laws. The appropriations requisite to pay the interest and capital shall always be included under expenditures in the estimates and shall not be the subject of discussion, provided that they are strictly in conformity with the laws which authorized the issue of-the loans in question.
Recourse shall not be had to borrowing except in the event

of extraordinary necessity, amortization of another loan, consolidation of
debt, or for purposes of production or connected with national defense. The law shall lay down rules respecting the conditions and purposes for which loans may be used. Chapter II The Budget Art. 232. The executive shall draw up annually the general budget of income and expenses and shall submit it to Congress through the ministry of the treasury during the first fifteen days of its installation. Art. 233. All the revenues and expenses of the State must be evaluated for each fiscal year and incorporated in the budget. Art. 234. Congress, upon hearing the proposals of the budget, may alter only the variable expenses; but the initiative for their increase or for altering the calculation of receipts belongs only to the executive. Art. 235. Provisions whose term exceeds that of the fiscal term shall not be included in the budget, nor shall those which do not refer exclusively to its interpretation and execution. Art. 236. The budget, once voted by Congress, shall become effective without the necessity of sanction or promulgation by the executive power. Art. 237. When Congress does not vote the law of the budget, the draft presented by the executive power shall be deemed to be such. Art. 238. Any surplus remaining at the end of one fiscal year shall be designated as income in the budget of the following year. When a fiscal year closes with a deficit, this shall be included as an expense of the following year. Art. 239. Any expenditure made beyond the budget is unlawful, and the official who orders the payment and the paying employee shall be jointly responsible for the sum paid, without prejudice to the penalties incurred in accordance with the law. Art.,240. Congress may not approve any new expense charged to the funds of the nation without creating or concretely indicating at the same time the necessary resources to provide for it. Art. 241. Any legislative provision in contravention of the foregoing article is invalid. Art. 242. For each fiscal year there may be only a single budget. In case of necessity Congress may pass a supplementary budget and if, during a recess of Congress, in the judgment of the executive power, a case of emergency occurs which calls for an expenditure beyond the budget, an extraordinary or supplementary credit may be opened by resolution of the President of the Republic in the council of ministers. The credit thus voted shall be legalized by Congress. Chapter III The Tribunal of Accounts Art. 243. The tribunal of accounts is the organ of fiscalization of the administration of the national treasury. It shall have responsibility for supervision of the execution of the budget and the function of controlling everything relative to the public finances, with power to oversee the

management of revenues and to examine and pass on the accounts of the administrators of fiscal funds. The fiscalization of local funds and the analysis of the corresponding accounts may be assigned by law to special comptrollers, provided that the tribunal of accounts shall have jurisdiction, upon appeal or by consultation, of the final decision and must approve the passing of the accounts. Art. 244. The tribunal of accounts shall enjoy autonomy. Its members may not be removed without just cause and by virtue of a proper resolution. The president of the tribunal of accounts shall have the same immunities and prerogatives as the ministers of state. Art. 245. Disagreements between the tribunal of accounts and other organs of the state shall be submitted to the determination of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 246. The organization, competence and attributes of the tribunal of accounts, as well as the appointment and duration of the term of its members and the requisites for exercising the office, shall be determined by law. Chapter IV Decentralized Services Art. 247. The services which constitute the industrial and commercial activity of the State may be administered by autonomous governing bodies or boards of directors, if provision to this effect is made by law for the greater efficiency of the services concerned and in the public interest. Art. 248. The act creating or constituting such agencies shall conform to the following rules: (1) The autonomous governing bodies or boards of directors shall consist of not less than three members appointed by the executive in council of ministers. The law shall indicate the bodies which shall be entitled to representation in such agencies and the manner of their selection by the executive; (2) Private capital may not be used in the constitution and development of the respective property except as Congress makes provision to this effect by a law which shall prescribe, and lay down the rules respecting, the participation to which shareholders will be entitled in the governing bodies or boards of directors; (3) Those bodies shall not be entitled to carry on any operations outside the sphere expressly assigned to them by law, nor may they use their resources for purposes other than their normal activities; (4) All autonomous administrative bodies shall publish periodical statements showing clearly their financial situation; (5) On the expiration of their term of office, the governing bodies or boards of directors shall give an account of their actions to the executive, who shall grant or refuse approval in conformity with a report of the tribunal of accounts; (6) The members of the governing bodies or boards of directors shall not be appointed to posts which are directly or indirectly connected with the institutions to which they belong.
TITLE IX

Sole Chapter National District, Departmental and Municipal Administration, Local Boards.

 665 1950

Art. 249. The government of the National District shall be in charge of the President of the Republic, who shall exercise it as determined by law. Art. 250, In each department there shall be a political chief and a police judge appointed by the President of the Republic. The political chief shall be in charge of the political administration of the department. The qualifications of the said officials, their functions and obligations shall be determined by law. Art. 251. The local administration of cities, towns, and villages shall be in charge of the municipalities appointed by the executive power every two years. Art. 252. To be a member of a municipality it is necessary to be above the age of twenty-one, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, to know how to read and write, and to have lived in the respective town for more than five years. Art. 253. The municipality of each one of the capital cities of the departments shall be made up of a mayor, a syndic and an alderman. The syndic must be a lawyer, but where there is no lawyer, he may be one who understands the law. The alderman shall have the office of municipal treasurer. The law shall determine the number of members of the other municipalities. Art. 254. The municipalities shall enjoy economic and administrative autonomy, subject to the supervision of the executive power. The administrators of the National District and the municipalities shall have the power to issue local laws and impose taxes binding within their respective areas, after approval by the executive. The same right and obligation shall belong to the boards of charity which have been or may be established by law. Art. 255. The properties and revenues of the National District, the municipalities, and the local boards are the exclusive property of each of them, respectively, and enjoy the same guarantees as the properties and revenues of private persons. No power of the State may grant exemption from taxes established in favor of the National District, the municipalities, or the local boards. Art. 256. The funds of the National District, the municipalities and the local boards shall be applied exclusively to the services of the respective communal administrations. Art. 257. The members of the National District, the municipalities and the local boards shall freely appoint the employees' dependent on them. Art. 258. The establishment of transit taxes, under any title whatsoever, by the National District, the municipalities or the local boards, is prohibited. Art. 259. The administrative members of the National District, the municipalities, and the local boards shall be individually responsible for the abuses they commit in the discharge of their offices.
TITLE X

Sole Chapter Electoral Justice Art. 260. To attend to all electoral matters, there shall be a special agency composed of a national council of elections situated in the capital

of the Republic, departmental councils of elections in each capital city, and electoral directories, one for each electoral board. Art. 261. The national council of elections shall be composed of a president and two judges. The president shall be appointed by the Supreme Court of Justice by an absolute majority of the votes of its members. The judges shall be appointed by the President of the Republic from lists of six lawyers provided by the two principal parties of the nation respectively. The President of the Republic shall choose a judge from each list. Art. 262. The identification and rights of the political parties and the definition of the two principal parties shall be the object of a law. Art. 263. The president and judges of the national council of elections shall have the same qualifications and enjoy the same immunities as the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice. Art. 264. The offices of president and judges of the national council of elections are incompatible with the discharge of any other office for which compensation is paid from fiscal or municipal funds, and with any participation in politics other than voting in the elections. Art. 265. The term of office of the members of the national council of elections shall be six years and shall begin on the date fixed by the electoral law. Art. 266. The national council of elections is autonomous and permanent. Its president will represent it, and he may communicate directly with any office of the State. Art. 267. The national council of elections shall exercise the supreme direction of matters related to electoral acts and proceedings, and shall have the following functions: (1) To exercise directive, correctional, and consultative superintendence over the other electoral organs; (2) To dictate all measures concerning the orderly conduct of the elections; (3) To decide in the last instance on all claims and appeals in the electoral processes; (4) To judge definitively the election of the President of the Republic; (5) To judge definitively the election of deputies and senators and other public officials whose designation is by popular election, and to issue the corresponding credentials; (6) To pronounce definitive judgment in controversies of a political character which arise between the parties or are advanced by individuals in relation to electoral matters; (7) To appoint the employees of its office; (8) To exercise the other attributes conferred upon it by the electoral law. Art. 268. The provisions of the foregoing article do not include the appeals that may be brought before the Supreme Court against the application of unconstitutional laws or against the listing, for elective posts, of persons who do not meet the requirements established by the Constitution. Art. 269. When the national council of elections acts as a tribunal, the presence of its president shall be necessary; it shall proceed as a jury in the judgment of the facts and shall decide in accordance with law. Art. 270. The offices of president and judges of the national council of elections shall be paid from public funds.


Art. 271. The electoral law shall regulate the functioning of the electoral councils and directories, as well as the length of the terms of office of the departmental councils and the date on which they begin. Art. 272. When a person is elected by popular vote to two or more offices in the same elections, he shall, by the fact of taking possession of one of them, be considered to have irrevocably renounced the others. And when this occurs in elections which are not simultaneous, he shall choose freely the office he prefers.
TITLE XI

Sole Chapter The Army Art. 273. The National Guard of Nicaragua is the only armed force and police force of the Republic, for the purpose of guaranteeing the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory, its internal peace and the security of individual rights. Any other armed forces, by the fact of their organization, shall be under the authority and control of the National Guard. Art. 274. The National Guard shall have a chief director, who shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. Art. 275. The National Guard is a non-political organization Its members, in line service, may not vote nor engage in political activities of any kind. Art. 276. The public force is essentially obedient and may not deliberate. As a result, no member of the military in active service may express an opinion which relates to matters of the service or which in any manner attacks or censures the laws of the Republic. Neither may he direct petitions, except on matters related to the good service and morality of the body and in accordance with the laws of its institution. Art. 277. The President of the Republic shall exercise the supreme command of the National Guard through the chief director. Art. 278. The organization and discipline of the National Guard shall be governed by the laws and regulations issued by the chief director with the approval of the President of the Republic. Art. 279. Members of the National Guard shall have a special court for purely military crimes and offenses, and shall be punished in accordance with the penal code of the institution. If they commit common crimes or offenses, they shall be under the jurisdiction of the ordinary laws and judges, in whose hands they shall be placed as offenders after their removal from the service. Art. 280. Military service is obligatory. The law shall determine the manner in which it must be given. Art. 281. The State guarantees protection and pensions to members of the National Guard who become incapacitated in the course of military service, and likewise to the families of those who lose their lives in such service. Art. 282. The chief director of the National Guard, with the approval of the President of the Republic, shall issue orders or regulations with reference to the manufacture, export, import, sale and carriage of arms and munitions.

669

Art. 283. Matters relating to transfers, internal mobilizations and maneuvers of the National Guard shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the chief director, who shall keep the President of the Republic informed.
TITLE XII

Sole Chapter The Fundamental Laws Art. 284. The following are fundamental laws: the Law of Amparo and the Martial Law.
TITLE XIII

Sole Chapter The Supremacy of the Constitution and Its Amendment Art. 285. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic. No laws, decrees, regulations, orders, dispositions, pacts, or treaties which are in conflict with it or which in any way alter its provisions have any validity. Art. 286. The organs of the State, jointly or separately, are forbidden to suspend the Constitution or to restrict the rights granted by it, except in the cases provided in the same. Laws which purport to regulate the exercise of the constitutional guarantees and rights shall be null in so far as those rights are diminished, restricted, or adulterated. Any official who violates this provision shall be liable for the damage caused. Art. 287. The Constitution and the fundamental laws may be amended only in the manner prescribed in Articles 149, 150, 151, and 152, in so far as they may be applicable, and upon condition that the amending law shall be ratified by the full Congress in the regular sessions following the new elections of deputies and senators. The executive may veto an amendment only when he receives it for promulgation after ratification by the full Congress, in which case the latter may ratify it constitutionally in accordance with the general rules.
TITLE XIV

Sole Chapter General Clauses Art. 288. The present Constitution shall take effect from its publication in the Official Gazette and supersedes the Constitution of 1939, now the Law of Guarantees. The originals of this Constitution shall be signed in quadruplicate by the absolute majority of the representatives and by the President of the Republic and the ministers of state. One shall be kept by the secretariat of the National Congress, another in the ministry of government, another in the Supreme Court of Justice, the fourth in the archives of the National Library, and each of these shall be considered the authentic text of the fundamental law of the Republic.


The President of the Republic shall have it published in the Official Journal as soon as the originals are signed. All public officials shall give
their oath faithfully to fulfill it and cause it to be fulfilled. Art. 289. The present laws shall continue in force in the Republic in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution or fundamental laws and so long as they are not amended or repealed.
TITLE XV

Sole Chapter
Transitory Dispositions First: In the exercise of the fullness of sovereignty belonging to the Constitutional Assembly, and in fulfillment of the decree of June 10, 1947, the following rules are established for the reorganization of the public powers of the State: (1) In accordance with the decrees of August 15 and September 10 of the year just passed, the office of President of the Republic shall be discharged by Dr. Victor Manuel Roman y Reyes for the period which expires May 1, 1952. (2) Before organizing itself as the regular Congress the National Constituent Assembly shall elect the three Designates for the Presidency of the Republic and the other officials who are to be elected by the National Congress in accordance with the present Constitution. (3) Upon the approval of the Constitution and the Fundamental Laws the Assembly shall be converted into the regular Congress and shall exercise
the legislative power until April 10, 1952. For this purpose it shall be divided into two Chambers in the following manner: (a) The Senate shall be composed of fifteen senators elected by the Assembly from among the representatives above the age of forty years and of the senators for life provided for in Article 141 of the Constitution. The respective alternates, even though they may be less than forty years of age, shall become alternate senators. (b) The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of the thirty-four representatives and their respective alternates who do not become senators in conformity with the foregoing provisions. (4) The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, respectively, may also, for this time only, include four elected senators and seven elected deputies with their respective alternates as follows: (a) The executive power within six months commencing on the day of the promulgation of the present Constitution shall, if it deems it appropriate, call elections for the choice, in a single electoral district comprising the whole country, of the four senators and the seven deputies mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Their term of office shall begin when they take their seats and shall end on April 10, 1952. (b) Until the seating of the senators and deputies who may be elected as provided above, these representatives shall not be counted in the determination of a quorum. (5) The other public officials who may have begun their terms of office in conformity with the Constitution of 1939 shall continue in the exercise of their functions until the termination of their respective current periods of service. Excepted from this rule are the members of the national council of elections whose term of office shall on this occasion terminate on March 31, 1951.

Given in the Hall of Sessions of the National Constituent Assembly
in Managua, National District, on the twenty-first day of the month of January, 1948.

