[PREAMBLE.]

In the presence of God, we, the representatives of the Nicaraguan people, in Constituent Assembly hereby decree and sanction the following Political Constitution.

TITLE

I.-The Nation.
ART 1. Nicaragua is a free, sovereign and independent nation. Its territory which comprises the adjacent islands is situated between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and the Republics of Honduras and Costa Rica.
ART. 2. The sovereignty is one, inalienable and imprescriptible, and resides essentially in the people, from whom the officials provided for by the Constitution and laws derive their powers. In consequence no compacts or treaties shall be concluded which are contrary to the independence or integrity of the nation, or affect its sovereignty in any way, except such as may look toward union with one or more of the Republics of Central America. 
ART. 3. Public officials shall have no other powers than those expressly conferred on them by law. All acts performed by them outside the law are void.

TITLE II.-The Form of Government. 
ART. 4. The government of Nicaragua is republican, democratic, representative and centralized. It consists of three independent powers: The legislative, the executive and the judicial. 

TITLE III.-Religion.
ART. 5. The majority of Nicaraguans profess the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman religion. The State guarantees the free exercise of this form of worship, as well as all others, provided they are not contrary to Christian morals and public order; the enactment of laws favoring or restricting certain forms of worship being prohibited.

TITLE IV.-Education.
ART. 6. The teaching of any lawful industry, trade or profession is free. Primary shall be compulsory, and that financed by the State shall also be gratuitous. As regards professional instruction, the law shall determine what professions require the granting of a degree previous to the exercise thereof, and the formalities for obtaining it.

TITLE V.-Nicaraguans.
ART. 7. Nicaraguans are native or naturalized. 
ART. 8. The following are natives: 1. Persons born in Nicaragua, of parents who are Nicaraguans or domiciled foreigners. 2. Children who are born abroad of a Nicaraguan father or mother, provided they choose Nicaraguan nationality. 
ART. 9. The following are naturalized: 1. Natives of other Central American Republics, who reside in Nicaragua, and declare their desire to be Nicaraguans before the competent authority.
2. Foreign women who marry Nicaraguans. 3. Spanish Americans who have resided one year in the country, and other foreigners who have resided there two years, provided they declare their desire to become naturalized before the proper authority. 4. Persons who have secured naturalization papers according to law. 
ART. 10. The following persons shall forfeit their Nicaraguan nationality: 1. Those who while residing in Nicaragua voluntarily secure naturalization in a foreign country not situated in Central America. However, they shall recover their Nicaraguan nationality by reestablishing their domicile in Nicaragua at whatever time this may occur. 2. Nicaraguan women who marry foreigners, provided they acquire the nationality of their husbands according to the law of the nation of the latter, but they shall recover Nicaraguan nationality upon becoming widows, if they lose the nationality of their husbands by reason of this cause. 
ART. 11. The provisions of this title may be modified by treaties, on condition of reciprocity. 

TITLE VI.-Foreigners.
ART. 12. The Republic of Nicaragua shall be a safe asylum for any person seeking refuge in its territory. ART. 13. Foreigners in Nicaragua shall enjoy all the civil rights of Nicaraguans; they are obliged to respect the authorities and to obey the laws, and, in regard to property acquired by them in the country, they shall be subject to all ordinary or extraordinary taxes levied against Nicaraguans. ART. 14. Foreigners shall not be allowed to lay claims against or demand any indemnity of the State, except in the cases and in the manner in which Nicaraguans may do so. 
ART. 15. Foreigners may resort to diplomatic channels only in case of denial of justice. The fact that any executory judgment is unfavorable to the claimant shall not be considered as such denial. If, in contravention of this provision, they shall not amicably terminate the claims which they have raised, they shall forfeit the right to dwell in the country. 
ART. 16. Extradition for political crimes is prohibited, even though a common law crime arises therefrom. Treaties and the law shall specify the cases in which extradition may take place for grave common law crimes.
ART. 17. The law shall establish the cases and the manner in which foreigners may be refused admission to, or be expelled from, the country.

TITLE VII.-Citizens.
ART. 18. All Nicaraguans who have reached the age of twenty-one years shall be citizens, as well as all those who have reached the age of eighteen who are married, or who are able to read and write. 
ART. 19. The following are the rights of citizens: 1. Suffrage. 2. To hold public office. 3. To have and bear arms- all in accordance with the law. ART. 20. The rights of a citizen are suspended: 1. By a warrant for imprisonment or a declaration that there are grounds for indictment. 2. By a sentence involving disfranchisement of the exercise of political rights, during the term of the sentence. 3. By a sentence imposing a penalty greater than a correctional penalty, as long as rehabilitation has not been obtained. 4. By mental incapacity. 5. By being a fraudulent debtor. 6. By notoriously vicious conduct. 7. By ingratitude toward one's parents. or unrighteous abandonment of wife or minor legitimate children. A previous legal declaratory decree shall be necessary in case of the grounds set forth under Paragraphs 4. 5. 6 and 7. 8. By acting in Nicaragua in the employ of foreign (not Central American) nations without the permission of the legislative power. ART. 21. The right to vote is individual and cannot be delegated. ART. 22. Suffrage shall be direct and public. Elections shall be held at the time and in the manner prescribed by law. 

TITLE VIII.- Rights and Guarantees
ART. 23. The inhabitants of the Republic, whether Nicaraguans or foreigners, shall be guaranteed individual safety, liberty, equality. and property rights. 
ART. 24. The death penalty shall be inflicted only for the crime of high treason committed in a foreign war in the fate of the enemy, and for the atrocious crimes of assassination, parricide and arson or robbery, resulting in death, and under grave circumstances specified by the law. 
ART. 25. The Constitution recognizes the guarantee of the habeas corpus. Consequently every inhabitant of the Republic has the right to the recourse of the exhibition of the person. 
ART. 26. A warrant of arrest, not issued from the competent authority or in accordance with the legal formalities, is illegal. 
ART 27. Detention pending inquiry into common law offenses shall not exceed eight days. plus the time required to cover distance, for the purpose of placing the accused at the disposal of the competent judge. ART. 28. A criminal caught in flagrante delicate may be apprehended by any person in order to be delivered immediately to the authority having the power to arrest. 
ART. 29. A warrant for imprisonment shall not be issued. unless there is ample evidence given beforehand that a punishable act deserving a penalty greater than a correctional penalty has been committed, and unless there is at least a grave presumption as to who is its author. 
ART. 30. Imprisonment or arrest as a penalty or as a means to enforce judicial orders is permissible in the cases and for the period prescribed by law. ART. 31. No person shall be tried by special commissions nor by judges other than by those designated by law prior to the commission of the deed giving rise to the action. ART. 32. No public authority shall be permitted to remove to another court cases pending before the competent authority, nor to reopen proceedings which have terminated. In criminal matters an appeal may be allowed for revision of finished cases in which a penalty greater than a correctional penalty has been imposed. The laws shall regulate the exercise of this right. 
ART. 33. In criminal matters the placing of a person under oath in regard to his own deeds is prohibited. ART. 34. No person may be deprived of the right of defense. Trials shall always be public. 
Any. 35. The infliction of perpetual or infamous penalties, whipping and all kinds of torture are prohibited. AIM. 36. Persons under arrest or imprisoned shall not be deprived of the right of communication except by virtue of a written order from the proper authority, and then for a period not to exceed three days, and only for grave crimes. ART. 37. Nobody shall be kept prisoner or detained in any other place than the public ones intended for that purpose, unless the law
ART. 37. Nobody shall be kept prisoner or detained in any other place than the public ones intended for that purpose, unless the law so permits and the guilty or detained party expressly consents thereto. 
ART. 38. The dwelling of every person shall constitute a safe and inviolable asylum to be forcibly entered only by the authorities in the following cases: 1. In the actual pursuit of a criminal or in order to take a criminal caught in flagrante delicto. 2. On demand from the inside of the house because a crime is being committed therein, or because of a scandalous disorder requiring prompt remedy. 3. In case of conflagration, earthquake, flood, epidemic or analogous events. 4. In order to remove objects sought by virtue of a process, there being at least partial proof beforehand of the existence of said objects, or in order to carry with a legally issued order of the court. ), In order to liberate a person who is being unlawfully sequestered. (6. In order to apprehend a criminal against whom a warrant for arrest or imprisonment for crime has been issued. there being at least partial proof beforehand that he is hiding in the house to be entered. In the last three cases the forcible entry shall not be made without a written order from a competent authority. 
ART. 39 i). When the dwelling to be forcibly entered is not that of the criminal who is being pursued, the permission of the owner or occupant shall first be requested. 
ART. 40. In the cases in which a written order from the authority is required, the house shall not be forcibly entered between the hours of 7 PM and six AM. without the consent of the owner or occupant. 
ART. 41. Epistolary correspondence is inviolable. That which is purloined from post offices or from any other place shall not be admissible as evidence against anyone. 
ART. 42. Private papers may be seized only by virtue of an order from a competent judge in the criminal or civil cases determined by law; and they shall be examined in the presence of the owner or. in his absence, in that of two witnesses, and such papers as do not relate to the matter under investigation shall be returned. ART. 43. No one shall be molested or persecuted on account of his opinions. Private acts which do not disturb public order or are not contrary to morals and do not cause injury to third parties shall always be beyond the pale of the law. 
ART. 44. All persons may communicate their thoughts freely by word of mouth or in writing without previous censorship, being liable according to law for any abuse of this freedom.
ART. 45. The enactment of proscriptive, confiscatory or retroactive laws or laws imposing infamous punishment shall be prohibited. ART. 46. The right to reclaim confiscated property is imprescriptible. 
ART. 47. Imprisonment for debts is prohibited. 
ART. 48. Freedom of assembly without arms and of associating for any lawful purpose is guaranteed. 
ART. 49. Entails are prohibited. 
ART 50. Every person has the right to address petitions to the legally constituted authority, and to have them decided upon and be informed of the decision reached in regard to them. 
ART. 51. Every person has the right to enter and leave the Republic. and to remain within its territory and to pass through it, in strict obedience to the laws. 
ART. 52. Every service which ought not to be rendered gratuitously according to law, shall be fairly remunerated. 
ART. 53. The law does not recognize personal privileges. 
ART. 54. Every legally capacitated person is free to dispose of his property under any legal title, but in no case shall entails be established. In testamentary successions there shall be compulsory assignments only in behalf of the descendants, ascendants and consorts, with the preference and limitations established by law. ART. 55. Congress alone can negotiate loans or levy direct or indirect taxes; and all authorities are prohibited from negotiating the former or levying the latter without its authorization, save the exceptions established by the Constitution. 
ART. 56. Proportionality shall be the basis for direct taxation. 
ART. 57. No one can be deprived of his property except by virtue of a judgment rendered by a competent authority or by reason of public utility. The expropriation in the latter case must be specifically prescribed by law or by judgment based on the law, and shall not be carried out without previous indemnification. In case of domestic or foreign war it is not necessary that this indemnification be previous. 
ART. 58. No person having the free right to administer his property shall be deprived of the right to terminate his civil law suits by compromise or arbitration. 
ART. 59. Every author, inventor, or owner of a trade-mark shall enjoy the exclusive ownership of his work or discovery or mark, and in the manner and during the time prescribed by law. 
ART. 60. No penalty greater than a correctional penalty shall be inflicted for common offenses without a verdict first being rendered by a jury as to the guilt of the accused party.
ART. 61. Monopolies in the interest of private individuals are prohibited. 
ART. 62. The declaration of a state of siege may temporarily suspend the guarantees mentioned. except: 1. That which establishes the inviolability of human life, with its exceptions. 2. That which prohibits trial by judges not designated by the law. 3. That which prohibits the infliction of infamous or perpetual penalties, whipping and any kind of torture. 4. That which prohibits the enactment of retroactive or confiscatory laws. 5. Those embodied in Articles 55 and 56. 6. The legal immunities of public officials. 
ART. 63. The laws regulating the exercise of constitutional guarantees shall be void in so far as they may diminish restrict or impair them. 
ART. 64. An official who without legal authority should restrict any of the guarantees contained in this title shall be liable for damages commensurate with the injury caused, without prejudice to other legal responsibilities.

TITLE IX.-THE

LEGISLATIVE POWER.

ART. 65. The legislative power is vested in a Congress composed of two houses: The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. the fifteenth day of December of each year without the necessity of a call. It shall hold 45 regular sessions subject to extension to 15 more.
ART. 66. Congress shall assemble in the capital of the Republic on
ART 67. It shall also hold extraordinary sessions, when convoked by the executive, and in this case it shall deal only with the matter, submitted to it by the latter. 
ART. 68. Congress may also convene or continue its sessions in any other town of the Republic without a call by the executive, but in no case shall the legal quorum be supplied by uninstalled substitutes. 
ART. 69. The election of deputies shall be by popular suffrage, direct and public. The departments of the Republic shall be divided for this purpose into as many electoral districts as they contain multiples of 15,000 inhabitants, a district being added, for fractions over shall elect a sitting deputy and a substitute. Each district 8,000. The regions of Cape Gracias a Dios and San Juan del Norte shall each be considered as an electoral district.
ART. 70. Each department shall be entitled to elect. one sitting and one substitute senator for every two deputies. Should the number of deputies be an odd one, another sitting and another substitute senator shall be elected. 
ART. 71. The law shall make the necessary demarcations for the elections. 
ART. 72. Five days before the date set for Congress to convene, the deputies and senators shall assemble and form their respective preparatory caucuses; and in the presence of at least five members of each house they shall organize the directories and shall draw up the necessary regulations for the assembling of their members and the solemn installation of Congress. 
ART. 73. One half plus one of the senators and deputies shall be sufficient in each house for its legal installation. ART. 74. Deputies shall continue four years in the exercise of their office, and shall be renewed by halves every two years. 
ART. 75. Senators shall continue six years in the exercise of their office, and shall be renewed by thirds every two years. 
ART. 76. To be a deputy, it is required: to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of the secular estate and over 25 years of age. 
ART. 77. To be a senator, it is required: to be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, of the secular estate and over 40 years of age. 
ART. 78. The following shall not be eligible as members of the legislative power: 1. Persons who have held office by appointment of the executive within two months preceding the election. 2. The magistrates of the courts of justice and the officials under them. 3. Relatives of the President of the Republic within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity. 4. Those who have managed or collected public funds while they have not cleared themselves in this respect. 
ART. 79. The representatives in Congress shall enjoy, from the date of their election, the following prerogatives: 1. Personal immunity from being accused or tried for official or common law crimes, unless Congress first declares that there are grounds for their indictment. 2. They shall not be subject to civil suit from thirty days before the regular sessions of Congress, or from the date of a decree calling an extra session, until fifteen days after the termination of either. If the suits are pending, the proceedings shall be suspended during the session. 3. They shall not be called into military service without their consent. 4. They shall not be banished from the Republic, confined or deprived of their liberty on any ground, even during a state of siege, unless Congress declares that there are grounds for their indictment. ART. 80. Members of Congress may accept offices from the executive power during recess; but during sessions they may only accept the offices of secretary of State, diplomatic agent, or professor of education. In either case they shall forfeit their character of representative by the acceptance of any office, except the last two mentioned. ART. 81. The executive shall give an account to the respective houses, when they are in session, of all appointments he has made, in order that they may order the vacancies filled. During recess of Congress, it shall be the duty of the executive to order the vacancies filled. ART. 82. The houses shall open and close their sessions at the same time, and neither of them shall suspend or extend them for more than three days without the concurrence of the other. 

TITLE X.--RIGHTS COMMON TO THE CHAMBERS.

ART. 83. It belongs to each of the houses. without the interference of the other: 1. To regulate the order of its sessions and everything relating to its internal management. 2. To pass upon the election and credentials of its members. 3. To compel their attendance. 4. To accept, by a two-thirds vote, the resignations of its members founded on duly verified legal grounds. 5. To order reelections in case of missing, deceased, resigned or incapacitated members. 6. To ask the executive for a statement of the receipts and expenditures of all or any of the accounts as well as for a detailed report on any branch of the administration. 7. To suggest a joint session to the other house.
ART 84. It belongs to Congress: 1. To regulate the order of its sessions. 2. To regulate the votes, to certify and declare the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to elect these officers in the cases provided by the Constitution. The President shall be that duly qualified citizen who receives the absolute majority of the votes of all qualified voters. If no person receives such a majority. Congress shall elect the President from among the two who have obtained the greatest number of votes, even though this number should be equal for both. The same rule shall be observed in the election of the Vice President. Ties occurring in the popular election or in that made by Congress shall be settled by lot, whenever this measure is necessary in order to apply the rules of the present article. 3. To elect each year two Designates who, in the order of their election, shall exercise the Presidency of the Republic, when there is an absolute or temporary default of the President and Vice President. It is indispensable that the election of the Designates be limited to members of the national legislature who fulfill the conditions required for being President of the Republic. 4. To elect the magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice and of the Courts of Appeal. 5.To act on the resignations of the President and Vice-President of the Republic and of the magistrates of the Courts of Justice. ;. To declare by a two-thirds vote when there are grounds for the impeachment of the President, Vice-President, senators, deputies. magistrates, secretaries of State and diplomatic agents of the Republic. 7. To extend for the executive the period established for the publication of laws and other provisions. s. To administer the constitutional oath to those public officials whom it elects or declares elected. 9. To declare the preference, when the same person is elected as a member of different branches of the supreme powers. in the following order: 1. President of the Republic. 2. Vice-President of the Republic. 3. Senator. 4. Deputy.

TiTLE XII.- Attribution of Congress when in Separate Session

ART. 85. It belongs to Congress, when convened in separate session: 1. To enact, construe, revise and repeal laws. 2.To create and abolish offices, establish pensions, confer honors and grant amnesties. 3. To take all suitable measures for the safety and defense of the Republic. 4. To change the residence of the supreme powers for grave causes; 5. To decree prizes and grant temporary privileges to authors inventors of things of general utility, and to persons who have introduced new industries or improved existing ones. 6. To grant subventions or premiums on objects of public utility which contribute toward establishing new industries or promoting agriculture. 7. To approve or disapprove the conduct of the executive. 8. To approve, modify or reject the treaties concluded with foreign nations. 9. To regulate maritime and land commerce. 10. To approve or disapprove the accounts of public expenditures. 11. To fix the budget annually. 12. To determine the duties of the officials of the Republic and designate the territorial jurisdictions within which they are to act. 13. To levy taxes. 14. To decree the alienation or lease of national property and the application thereof to public uses, or to authorize the executive to do so on conditions suitable to the Republic. The public revenues or taxes shall not be alienated or leased out. 15. To authorize loans and to regulate the payment of the national debt, or to determine the conditions on which the executive shall do so. 16. To open up ports, create, transfer or abolish custom-houses, or lay down the rules in accordance with which the executive may do so. 17. To fix the weight, fineness, value, type and denominations of national money, and to regulate the system of weights and measures. is. To declare war and to conclude peace or authorize the executive to do so. 19. To fix the strength of land and naval forces at each regular session. 20. To permit or refuse the passage of troops of another country through the territory of the Republic, and to authorize the departure of national troops from Nicaragua. During a state of war, the executive power shall have these attributions. 21. To declare a state of siege and even to suspend the constitutional order of things throughout the Republic, or any part thereof, when the public peace is threatened or in case of foreign aggression. Such a declaration or suspension shall last sixty days. at the most, according to circumstances, a new declaration by Congress being necessary to prolong it. 22. To confer the grades of general of brigade and of division. 23. To grant pardons or commutations of sentence at the instance of the executive power after receiving a detailed report from the Supreme Court of Justice. 24. To award prizes or rewards for eminent services. 25. To approve or disapprove the contracts concluded by the executive with private individuals or with companies, regarding loans, colonization, navigation and other works of general utility, provided they are permitted by the Constitution and involve temporary privileges or affect the property of the nation, or when money not appropriated in the budget is available. 26. To permit the foundation montepios and banks of issue. 27. To determine the coat of arms and the flag of the Republic. 28. To grant or refuse permission to Nicaraguans to accept offices from foreign countries, when the duties thereof are to be discharged in Nicaragua. 
ART. 86. The legislative power cannot supply or declare the civil status of persons, or confer academic or literary degrees. 
ART. 87. The powers of the legislative power cannot be delegated, except the authority to legislate in the departments of Interior. Police, Charity and Public Instruction, which may be delegated to the executive power during the recess of Congress; and the powers relating to the administration of the constitutional oath to officials whom it elects or declares elected. 
ART. 88. In the measures and laws enacted by Congress, the following formula shall be used: "The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies of the Republic of Nicaragua decree, resolve or declare: (here follows that which is decreed or resolved). Given in the Sessions Hall of Congress " (when in joint session), or of the house in which the measure originated (when in separate session), place and date. Then follow the signatures of the President and secretaries of Congress or of the house, as the case may be. Upon the measure being approved in the other house, the latter shall say: "To the Executive Power. the Chamber of the Senate or Chamber of Deputies " (as the case may be), setting down the proper place and date with the signatures of the presiding officer and secretaries concerned. 
ART. 89. All motions of the legislative power shall be enacted in the form of law or resolutions. 
ART. 90. Every bill or resolution may originate in either of the houses, only measures relating to taxes or imposts being reserved to the Chamber of Deputies. 
ART. 91. Only the deputies and the senators in their respective houses, the ministers on behalf of the executive and the Supreme Court of Justice in matters pertaining to their branch have the right to recommend such bills, resolutions or declarations as they may deem convenient.
ART. 92. When a bill is passed by one house, it shall go as an original measure to the other. which shall take it under consideration, and may pass it or not, or amend it. In the latter case, the bill shall be considered as originating in the house which revises it. 
ART. 93. No bill shall be finally passed until subjected to two deliberations on different days, except in case of urgency. as determined by two thirds of the votes, when there shall be only one deliberation. 
ART. 94. Every bill upon being passed by Congress in separate session shall be forwarded to the executive within three days at the latest after passage in order that he may give it his sanction and have it promulgated as a law within ten days. 
ART. 95. If the President, with the advice and consent of the Council of Ministers. should find objections to sanctioning the bill. he shall return it to Congress within five days. setting forth the reasons on which he bases his dissension. If he does not object to it within the period mentioned, it shall be considered as being sanctioned, and shall be published as a law. When the executive returns the bill, Congress shall subject it to a further deliberation in joint session, and if it is then ratified by two thirds of the votes, it shall be again forwarded to the executive with this formula: " Ratified constitutionally ", whereupon the executive shall cause it to be published without delay. 
ART. 96. When Congress passes a bill during the last five days of its session, and the executive deems it inexpedient to sanction it, he shall immediately give notice to Congress in order that it may remain in session for ten day beginning from the date on which the autograph was transmitted to him, if he fails to do this, the law shall be considered sanctioned. 
ART. 97. When a bill has been rejected, it cannot be brought forward again until the next legislature. 
ART. 98. The sanction of the executive is necessary in the following decrees and resolutions: 1. In elections made or declared by Congress and in resignations accepted or declined. 2. In regulations issued by Congress or by the houses for their internal government. 3. In resolutions for convening, for transferring its seat to another place, and for suspending or extending its sessions. 4. In the budgetary law. 5. In decrees relating to the conduct of the executive. 6. In declarations that there are grounds for impeachment. 
ART. 99. Whenever the purpose of a bill not emanating from the Supreme Court of Justice is to revise or repeal provisions of the Civil Code, Penal Code, Code of Commerce or Code of  Procedure, it shall not be discussed without hearing the opinion of said Court, which shall give it either during the same session or that of the next year, according to the extent, importance, or urgency of the bill. 
ART. 100. The formula which is to be used in publishing the laws is the following: "The President of the Republic to the inhabitants thereof, Know ye that Congress has ordained as follows (here the text and signatures). Therefore let it be enforced."

TTLE XIII.-THE EXECUTIVE POWER.
ART. 101. The executive power shall be held by a citizen called the President of the Republic, in his default by the Vice-President, and in the default of the latter by one of the Designates according to their order. ART. 102. The President of the Republic. the Vice-President and the Designates must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, over 30 years of age, of the secular estate and natives of Nicaragua. 
ART. 103. The election of President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be by popular vote, direct and public. 
ART. 104. The term of office of the President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be four years, and shall begin on the first of January. No citizen who holds the office of President, either as the duly elected incumbent or accidentally, shall be eligible to the office of President or Vice-President for the next term. ART. 105. No person shall be elected President or Vice-President who is related by consanguinity or affinity in a direct line, or up to the fourth degree inclusive in a collateral line, with the President of the Republic or with the person holding the office of President during the last six months prior to the election. ART. 106. In case of the absolute or temporary default of the President of the Republic, the executive power shall devolve upon the Vice-President, and in default of the latter upon one of the Designates in the order of their election. In the latter case, should Congress be in session, it shall be its duty to authorize the entrustment of the office to the Representative whom it may designate. who must fulfill the requirements for President of the Republic. ART. 107. Until the person designated by law enters upon the office of President of the Republic. the executive power shall be exercised by the Minister of the Interior, who shall give up possession to the new official if Congress is not in session. ART. 108. The President shall not leave the country during- the exercise of his functions without permission of Congress. nor shall he do so at the end of his term, if there are proceedings pending against him for official or common-law offenses. 

TITLE XIV.-DUTIES AND ATTRIBUTIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE POWER.

ART. 109. The President of the Republic is the Chief Magistrate of the nation and Commander-in-Chief of the land and naval forces. He has charge of the general administration of the country which he shall carry on through the ministers or secretaries of State and the respective under-secretaries. 
ART. 110. The law shall determine the number of secretaries of State and the distribution of duties among them. 
ART. 111. The attributions of the executive power are as follows: 1. To defend the independence and the honor of the nation and the integrity of its territory. 2. To enforce and have enforced the Constitution and laws, issuing the necessary decrees and orders for the purpose, without altering the spirit of the former. 3 To appoint secretaries and under-secretaries of State and the other executive officers. 4. To preserve the domestic peace and security of the Republic and repel all attacks and aggressions from abroad. 5. To afford the functionaries of the judicial power such aid and force as they may need to make their decisions effective. 6. To remove the employees appointed by his own free will. 7. To recommend to Congress, when required by the public welfare, amnesties, pardons or commutations of sentence of criminals, and to grant amnesties during the recess of Congress. 8. To call extra sessions of Congress, when the interests of the nation require. 9. To present to the legislative power through the secretaries of State within fifteen days from the date on which Congress convenes a detailed report on the administrative branches, an itemized account of the proceeds and expenditures of the revenues, and the budget of expenses for the ensuing year. pointing out improvements of which the legislation may be susceptible. 10. To conclude treaties and any other diplomatic negotiations, submitting the same to Congress for its ratification. 11. To direct foreign relations, to appoint consuls, agents or diplomatic ministers of the Republic, and to admit and receive those appointed by foreign nations. 12. To cause the revenues of the Republic to be collected and expended in accordance with the law. 13. To confer military grades in time of peace up to the rank of colonel, inclusive, and the higher grades up to general of division in the field; and to recommend to Congress the conferring of these latter grades in time of peace. 14. To assemble the military forces of land and sea, organize them and distribute them in accordance with the law and the needs of the Republic. 15. To grant letters of marque and reprisal. 16. To declare a state of siege and even suspend the constitutional order, during the recess of Congress, in the cases and under the conditions provided in Paragraph 21 of Article 85. 17. To grant naturalization papers. 18. To direct and encourage public instruction, to diffuse popular education, and exercise supreme supervision over private institutions of learning. 19. To sanction laws. use the veto power in appropriate cases, and promulgate without delay all legislative measures which do not require the sanction of the executive. 20. To order the vacancies of deputies and senators filled, during the recess of the legislative power. within one month at the latest from the time they occur. 21. To publish monthly statements of the receipts and expenditures of the public revenues. 22. To watch over the legal exactness of money. and to decide what may be proper regarding the admission and circulation of foreign money. To see to the uniformity of weights and measures, and in general to exercise supreme police supervision. 23. To attend to the internal security and external defense of the country. 24. To conclude contracts for the purpose of supplying the needs of the administration and to submit to the ratification of Congress those which relate to loans, colonization, navigation and other works of utility, as well as those which involve temporary privileges or affect national property, or when money not appropriated in the budget is available. 25. To declare war with the authorization of Congress and to conclude peace when the convenience of the nation requires. 26. To direct the operations of war as Commander-in-Chief of the national army and navy. When he wishes to place himself at the head of the army, he shall commit the office of President to the person who is to take his place in accordance with the Constitution, and he shall remain invested solely with the character of Commander-in-Chief and with the attributions of Commanding General. 27. To see that Congress convenes on the date set by the Constitution, taking the necessary measures for the purpose in due time. 28. To grant patents in order to guarantee for a certain period literary property and useful inventions applicable to new industries or to the improvement of those already existing.
29. To designate, during the recess of Congress, the place where the government authorities shall transfer their seat when serious reasons arise for taking this step. 30. To raise the necessary force in order to repel any invasion or to quell rebellions, and in these cases to decree taxes or loans and give an account to Congress at its next session. 31. To dispose the land and naval forces for the defense and security of the Republic in order to maintain order and tranquility therein, and for any other purpose demanded by the public service. 32. To rehabilitate, in accordance with the law, those citizens who may be suspended in the exercise of their rights. 33. To take the necessary measures in order that the elections may be held at the time prescribed by law. and in order that the rules provided by the law may be observed. 34. To close or open ports during the recess of Congress. 35. To adopt regulations governing his attributions. 36. To adopt suitable measures for taking the census of the population and other branches of the national statistics. 37. To establish special rules for the temporary government of regions which are uninhabited or which are inhabited by uncivilized natives. 38. To determine the rules to which the occupation or alienation of vacant public lands shall be subject, and to devote these lands to colonization and useful enterprises. 39. To suspend the execution of the death penalty whenever requested to take the initiative in commuting a sentence, being obliged to give an account to Congress at its next session. ART. 112. When the public tranquility is threatened, the executive may issue warrants of arrest against persons presumed to be guilty, and examine them, placing them at the disposal of the competent judges within ten days; but if it is necessary in the opinion of the executive to confine in the interior or to expel from the Republic any persons suspected of conspiracy or treason, he shall decide on the proper steps to be taken in the Council of Ministers and with the votes of two sitting senators. If public order is disturbed. the concurrence of the senators shall not be indispensable. ART. 113. The President and his ministers and senators, as the case may be, shall be responsible for the measures adopted by them against the Constitution and the laws. In civil matters the responsibility shall be joint.

TITLE XV.-SECRETARIES OF STATE. 
ART. 114. The secretaries of State must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, natives of Nicaragua, of the secular estate and over 25 years of age. All decrees, resolutions and orders of the President of the Republic must be authorized by the secretaries of State within their respective branches. 
ART. 115. The following persons cannot be secretaries of State: 1. Contractors for public works or services on account of the nation. 2. Persons who as a result of their contracts have claims in their own interest against the. public treasury. 3. Debtors of the public treasury. 4. Persons administering public funds, until their accounts are finally settled. 5. Relatives of the President of the Republic within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity. ART. 116. The secretaries of State may attend, without voting, the deliberations of the legislative power, and they shall be obliged to attend whenever called upon and answer inquiries made of them by any representative in regard to the affairs of the administration, except those relating to war and foreign relations, when secrecy is deemed necessary, unless the house decides to the contrary.

TITLE XVI.-THE JUDICIAL POWER.

ART. 117. The judicial power of the Republic shall be exercised by a Supreme Court of Justice, by the Courts of Appeal, and by the judges and other employees which the law may establish. The Supreme Court shall reside at the capital, and shall be composed of five sitting magistrates. There shall be also two substitute magistrates. There shall be three Courts of Appeal, one situated in the city of Granada, another at Le6n, and the third at Bluefields. The first two shall be composed of six sitting magistrates, three for each of the two sections, civil and criminal: that of Bluefields shall have three sitting magistrates, and two substitute magistrates. The inferior judges shall be determined by statute. The magistrates of the Supreme Court and of the Courts of Appeal shall be appointed by Congress in joint session. The term of office of the former shall be six years, and that of the latter four years. Congress may create other Courts of Appeal. 
ART. 118. The magistrates must be citizens in the exercise of their rights, of the secular estate, lawyers and over 30 years of age. 
ART. 119. Persons connected by relationship of consanguinity within the fourth degree, or of affinity within the second degree cannot be magistrates or judges in the same court. If two or more persons related within these degrees are elected, the person receiving the highest number of votes shall be preferred, and in case of a tie, the senior lawyer. The election of the others shall be made over again. 
ART. 120. The law shall regulate the organization of the judicial power and the administration of justice. ART. 121. The right to judge and carry out judgments belongs to the courts and the other tribunals of justice. ART. 122. The tribunals and judges of the Republic shall preferably apply: 1. The Constitution and constitutive laws. 2. The laws and legislative decrees. 3. The executive decrees and resolutions. In no case shall they apply provisions or revisions made by virtue of an official communication. 
ART. 123. The Supreme Court of Justice shall furthermore exercise the following attributions: 1. To adopt its internal rules. 2. To take exclusive cognizance of official and common offenses committed by the high officials, when Congress has declared that there are grounds for their impeachment. 3. To authorize lawyers, court clerks, or notaries who have been admitted within or outside the Republic to the practice of their profession, and to suspend and reinstate them in accordance with the law. 4. To take cognizance of appeals against the resolutions of the Court of Accounts. 5. To take cognizance of appeals for review and for asylum in the cases provided by law. 6. To take cognizance of maritime prize cases, and of the other matters referred to it by law. 7. To appoint inferior judges, forensic physicians and registrars of the property in accordance with the law. 8. To accept the resignations of the employees appointed by it, and even to remove them before the expiration of their term of office, with or without stating grounds for doing so, it being necessary in the latter case that the resolution be adopted unanimously. 9. To decide the protests made against ordinances issued by municipalities and other local administrative corporations, when contrary to the Constitution and the laws. 
ART. 124. Any person injured in his rights by the application of a law in a particular case may challenge the constitutionality thereof relates directly before the Supreme Court of Justice, provided the law justice. ART. 125. The administration of justice in the Republic shall be gratuitous. 
ART. 126. Members of courts of justice shall not hold any office filled by popular election, or carrying with it additional jurisdiction. 
ART. 127. Courts of justice may demand the aid of the armed forces for the execution of their decisions and if the armed forces are refused them, or are unavailable, they may demand such aid from the citizens. Any official or citizen who unduly refuses to render that aid shall incur liability. 
ART. 128. In no case shall there be more than three instances, and the same judges shall not officiate in more than one thereof. 
ART. 129. In civil matters, the jury may be called upon to pass on the facts when so requested by the parties, and in this case the judge shall merely apply the law. 
ART. 130. The magistrates of the courts of justice shall enjoy the same immunities and prerogatives as the representatives in Congress, except the exemption from civil suit. ART. 131. The magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice may, with a voice but without a vote, attend the deliberations of either of the legislative houses, or of both in joint session, whenever they relate to matters originating in said court or to those dealt with in Article 99. 

TITLE XVII.-The Budget.

ART. 132. The budget shall be passed by Congress in view of the recommendations of the executive and judicial powers, within their respective spheres. ART. 133. The budget bill shall be presented by the Minister of the Treasury fifteen days at the latest after Congress convenes. 
ART. 134. All expenditures made outside of the budget are unlawful, and the official ordering them and the disbursing officer shall be jointly responsible for the amount expended, without prejudice to whatever penalties may be incurred according to law. 
ART. 135. The treasury of the nation shall comprise: 1. All its real and movable property. 2. All outstanding credits. 3. All duties, imposts and taxes paid into the treasury by the inhabitants of the Republic. 
ART. 136. For the administration of the public revenues, there shall be a general office for collection and disbursement as well as such other offices as may be necessary. 
ART. 137. In order to hold the office of Treasurer General, it shall be necessary to be over 30 years of age, a citizen in the exercise of his rights, and of well-known good conduct, and not be a creditor or debtor to the public treasury or have accounts pending therein.
ART. 138. For the purpose of exercising the supervision of the national treasury, there shall be a Court of Accounts, which shall be in charge of examining and finally settling the accounts kept by officers administering public interests. The members of this Court must fulfill the same requirements as the Treasurer General. but all employees except the president may be appointed when they are over 25 years of age. Their number, organization and attributions shall be determined by the law, and their appointments as well as that of the Treasurer General belong to tie executive power. ART. 139. No public authority, official or corporation can conclude contracts in which property or funds belonging to the nation or to local boards are involved for any purpose, without previously calling for bids and publishing proposals made. Cases are excepted in which, owing to the nature of the contracts, these must be concluded with certain individuals, or in which, owing to the small amount involved, it is not necessary to call for bids. The law shall regulate this matter.

TITLE XVIII.-The Army.

ART  140. The public forces are established for the sake of assuring the rights of the nation, the enforcement of law and the maintenance of public order. ART. 141. The discipline of the army shall be regulated by military laws and ordinances. No armed body shall be allowed to deliberate or to exercise the right of petition. Soldiers in actual service shall not be permitted to hold offices filled by popular election. 
ART. 142. Military service is compulsory, but in time of peace this duty may be discharged through substitutes. Every male Nicaraguan from 18 to 45 years of age is a soldier in the army. The law shall provide for the proper organization, and specify the grounds for exemption from service. Ministers of any form of religious worship shall render service in the army only as chaplains or in the ambulance service. 
ART. 143. There shall be no attractive jurisdiction, and military persons in actual service shall be subject to military jurisdiction for purely military offenses.

TITLE XIX.-DEPARTMENTAL GOVERNMENT.

ART 44. For purposes of political administration, the territory of the Republic shall be divided into departments, and there may be districts, the number and boundaries of which shall be fixed by law. 

TITLE XX.-MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT.

ART. 145. The local government of the towns shall be in charge of municipalities elected by the popular, public and direct vote of the citizens of the respective towns in accordance with the law. 
ART. 146. The number of members of the municipalities shall be determined by law, taking into account the number of inhabitants of each town. 
ART. 147. The attributions of the municipalities shall be purely economic and administrative. They shall be determined by law. as shall also the requirements laid down in order to become a member thereof. 
ART. 148. Municipalities may freely levy local taxes in accordance with the Constitution and the general laws, submitting them to the approval of the executive when they affect solely the interests of the respective town or of the department to which it belongs, and to the legislative power when they impose burdens on one or more other departments, even though indirectly. 
ART. 149. Municipalities shall administer the funds of the community for the benefit of the latter, rendering an account to the superior authority established by law, and they shall publish annually a detailed report of the receipts and expenditures of their funds. 
ART. 150. In the exercise of their exclusive functions, they shall be independent of the other authorities, but in no case shall they act against the general laws of the country; and they shall be responsible collectively and individually before the courts of justice for any abuses they may commit. 
ART. 151. Municipalities shall appoint their own Officials, and they may also appoint local police agents for purposes of order. security, sanitation, comfort, improvement and recreation, and they may enact regulations on this subject, subject to the general laws. ART. 152. The members of the municipalities shall not be obliged to discharge any other duties, not even military service in time of war. ART. 153. Municipal resolutions having the character of local laws shall be submitted for the approval of the executive. 

TITLE XXI.-THE RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS. 
ART. 154. Every public official upon assuming office shall take an oath to observe and cause to be observed the Constitution and the laws, and shall be responsible for his acts. ART. 155. The President of the Republic, senators, deputies, magistrates of the courts of justice, secretaries and under-secretaries of State and ministers and diplomatic agents shall be responsible before Congress for common offenses and for official offenses which they may commit in the exercise of their functions, for the purpose of declaring whether or not there are grounds for their indictment and placing the culprit at the disposal of the competent court. 
ART. 156. Once a judgment has been pronounced declaring a person guilty of an official offense, the guilty party can not be granted a pardon.
ART. 157. Notwithstanding the approval which Congress may give to the conduct of the executive, the President and the secretaries of State may be indicted for official offenses up to five years after they have ceased in the exercise of their office. ART. 158. When it has been declared that there are grounds for the indictment of a public official in the full exercise of his duties, and the latter has been freed of the charge, he shall resume the discharge of his duties.


TITLE XXII.-CONSTITUTIVE LAWS.

159. The following laws are constitutive: the press law, the martial law and the law of asylum (amparo).
ART.

TITLE XXIII.-THE REFORM OFTHE CONSTITUTION AND CONSTITUTIVE LAWS

ART. 160. Whenever a partial reform of the Constitution or constitutive laws is deemed appropriate, this may be done, observing the following rules: 1. The bill shall be presented by two or more members of the houses and read twice, with an interval of four days. 2. Upon being taken up for debate, it shall be referred to a committee which shall present its report thereon within six days. 3. The report shall be read twice, on different days. 4. When the revised law has been approved by two thirds of the votes in each one of the houses, it shall be published by the press. 5. The reform shall be without legal effect until it has received the approval of two thirds of the votes in the next legislature, after a lapse of two years. in compliance with the usual procedure. 
ART. 161. The reform of the articles of the Constitution which forbid the reelection of the person who exercises the Presidency of the Republic shall not be effective during the period in which said reform is made, nor in the following one. 
ART. 162. Treaties or compacts referred to in the last part of Article 2 shall be ratified by a two thirds vote of each house. and by this act the Constitution shall be considered as amended, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. 
ART. 163. An absolute constitutional reform may not be made until after a lapse of ten years, and for this purpose the regulations of Article 160 shall be observed. A declaration to this effect having been made, a Constituent Assembly shall be convened.
ART. 164. The ordinary Congress, upon declaring that the Constitution should be entirely reformed, shall close its sessions and become ip8o facto dissolved. 

TITE XXIV.--GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

ART. 165. The present Constitution supersedes that of 30 March 1905 and the Law of Guarantees of 15 September 1910; moreover it declares the Constitution signed on 4 April of the present year by the previous Constituent Assembly to be null and void. 
ART. 166. Until revised or repealed other laws shall remain in force, provided they are not contrary to the provisions of this Constitution. 
ART. 167. The present Constitution shall go into force on 1 March 1912.

TITLE XXV.-TRANSiTORY PROVISIONS.

ART. 168. Pending the convening of the first Constitutional Congress elected in the manner and at the time established by the electoral law decreed by the present Constituent Assembly, the latter shall continue to discharge its duties and those which belong to the ordinary Congress in accordance with the Constitution. For this purpose it can suspend its sessions and reopen them whenever it deems it proper.
ART. 169. The renewal of the deputies during the first biennial period shall be made by lot, as shall also be that of the senators during the first and the second biennial periods. 
ART. 170. The decrees of the present Constituent Assembly in regard to the appointments of President and of Vice-President of the Republic and magistrates of the courts of justice shall remain in full force and effect for the time which they respectively comprise.
ART. 171. The decrees of 18 May, 15 July and 14 October last regarding the creation, attributions and powers of the Mixed Commission shall likewise remain in full force and effect, notwithstanding the provisions of this Constitution. The present National Constituent Assembly shall without any restriction enact such reformatory and supplementary laws and provisions as may be conducive to the objects stated in such decrees. 
ART. 172. As soon as the Constitution is promulgated, all public employees shall take the oath in legal form to strictly and faithfully observe all its provisions.


