Title: Date Adopted: Date Promulgated: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

Republic of Niger: Constitution of the Fourth Republic, 22 May 1996 05/12/1996 05/22/1996 Niger Oceana Publications, Inc. Proprietary Marcia W. Coward (constitution); Anne-Françoise Bewley (amended articles)

REPUBLIC OF NIGER CONSTITUTION OF THE FOURTH REPUBLIC 22 May 1996 Table of Contents PREAMBLE TITLE I: THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY TITLE II: RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE HUMAN PERSON TITLE III: EXECUTIVE POWER TITLE IV: LEGISLATIVE POWER Section I : The National Assembly Section II : The Second Chamber TITLE V: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE POWERS TITLE VI: CONTROL OVER THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF LAWS TITLE VII: JUDICIAL POWER Section I : The Supreme Court Section II : The High Court of Justice TITLE VIII: ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL COUNCIL TITLE IX: THE SUPERIOR COUNCIL OF COMMUNICATIONS

TITLE X: TERRITORIAL COLLECTIVITIES TITLE XI: TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS TITLE XII: COOPERATION AND ASSOCIATION WITH STATES TITLE XIII: ON REVISION TITLE XIV: TRANSITORY AND FINAL PROVISIONS

PREAMBLE We, the Sovereign Nigerian People — Profoundly committed to the civilized values which underlie our personality ; — Careful to safeguard our cultural and spiritual identity ; — Resolved to consolidate the accomplishments of the Republic and of the national independence proclaimed respectively on December 18, 1958 and August 3, 1960, and to build a State based on law, a united Nation, dignified, industrious and prosperous ; — Proclaim our commitment to the principles of pluralist democracy and to the Rights of Man as they are defined by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of 1948, the African Charter of the Rights of Man and of People of 1981, and those which are guaranteed by the present Constitution, — Reaffirm our commitment to African unity and our commitment to set to work to realize regional and sub-regional integration, — Express our wish to cooperate in friendship and equality with all peoples who long for peace, justice and liberty, — Adopt solemnly the present Constitution, Supreme Law of the State, to which we swear our loyalty, fidelity and respect. TITLE I THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY Article 1. The State of Niger is an independent and sovereign Republic.

Any attack on the republican form of the State shall be considered a crime of high treason, punishable by law. The Republic's Capital is Niamey. The national Emblem is a tricolor flag composed of three (3) equal rectangular horizontal bands, which, from top to bottom, are orange, white and green. An orange disc is in the center of the middle band. The Hymn of the Republic is "La NIGERIENNE" The Motto of the Republic is "FRATERNITY-WORK-PROGRESS." The State Seal, whose diameter is forty millimeters, is composed of a coat of arms containing a sun bordered on the right by a spear bearing two Touareg swords radiating upward from its bottom, and at the left by three stalks of grain, one upright and two radiating from its bottom, accompanied at its point by the head of a zebu, all in gold. The following inscriptions shall be in relief: — at the top: "Republic of Niger"; — at the bottom: "Fraternity-Work-Progress." The [ceremonial] arms of the Republic are composed of Sinople coat of arms with a blazing sun of gold, bordered at the right by a spear bearing two Touareg swords radiating upward from its bottom, and, at left, by three stalks of grain, one upright and two radiating upward from its bottom, accompanied at its point by the head of a zebu, all in gold. This coat of arms lies against a trophy of four flags of the Republic of Niger. The inscription "Republic of Niger" is placed below. Article 2. The use of all properties of the Republic is reserved for public power. Any illegal usage of properties of the Republic toward private ends or secular use is punishable by law. Article 3. All communities comprising the Nigerian Nation shall enjoy the freedom of using their own languages in respect to each other. These languages have, in all equality, the status of national languages. The law establishes the modalities of their promotion and development.

The official language is French. Article 4. The Republic of Niger is one and indivisible, democratic and social. Its fundamental principles are: — government of the People, by the People and for the People; — separation of Church and State. Article 5. National sovereignty belongs to the People. National sovereignty shall not be exercised by any fraction of the People nor by any individual. In the exercise of the power of the State, personal power, regionalism, ethnocentricity, clannishness, nepotism, feudalism, illicit enrichment, favoritism, corruption, and influence trafficking are banned, under pain of judicial prosecution. Article 6. The people exercise their sovereignty through elected representatives and through referendum. Circumstances which call for referendum shall be determined by law. The Supreme Court shall oversee voting operations and shall announce results. Article 7. Suffrage is universal, free, equal, direct and secret. Under conditions determined by law, electors are Nigerians of both sexes who shall have reached the age of 18 years on election day, or emancipated minors who are enjoying civil and political rights. Article 8. The Republic of Niger is a State founded on law. Equality is assured everyone under the law without distinction to sex or to social, racial, ethnic or religious background.

All beliefs shall be respected and protected. No religion or belief shall claim political power or interfere in affairs of state. The dispensation of any divisive propaganda of a regional, racist or ethnic character, and any display of racial, ethnic, political or religious discrimination shall be punishable by law. While within the territory of the Republic, foreigners benefit from the same rights and liberties as Nigerian citizens, according to conditions determined by law. Article 9. Within the framework of freedom of association recognized and guaranteed by the present Constitution, parties, alliances of political parties, syndicates and other associations may be formed and may participate in activities freely as long as they act in respect to the principles of national sovereignty and of democracy, and according to the laws of the Republic. Parties and groups of political parties concur in the expression of suffrage. The same prerogatives are recognized for every Nigerian citizen enjoying his civil and political rights and fulfilling the conditions of eligibility specified by the law Political parties of an ethnic, regional, or religious character are forbidden. No party can be created for the purpose of promoting an ethic group a region or a religion, on pain of judicial prosecution. TITLE II RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE HUMAN PERSON Article 10. Each human being is sacred. The State has an absolute obligation to respect and to protect the individual. The full nurturing of each individual is guaranteed. Article 11. Each person has the right to life, health, liberty, security, physical and mental well being, education, and instruction according to conditions established by law. Article 12. No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruelty or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Article 13.

Each individual and each agent of the State who is found guilty of acts of torture, of cruelty, or of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in the exercise of or in any way related to the exercise of his duties, whether under his or her own initiative or under instructions, shall be punished according to the law. Article 14. Each person has the right to full economic, secular, intellectual and spiritual development, as long as such development does not violate the right of others or infringe on the constitutional or legal order or on good morality. Article 15. No one can be arrested or incarcerated except under a law adopted previously and when informed of the facts. No citizen may be confined in exile or deported. Article 16. No law or regulation can be retroactive except where it concerns rights and benefits that can be conferred on the citizen. Article 17. Any persons accused of a felonious act shall be presumed innocent until their guilt is established legally through a public process during which all necessary guarantees for his or her defense shall be assured. No person shall be condemned for the commission or omission of any act which, at the time when it was committed, did not constitute an infraction under national law. Likewise, no person shall be inflicted with any penalty stronger than that applicable at the time the infraction was committed. Article 18. Marriage and the family constitute the natural and moral basis of the human community. Both shall be under the protection of the State. The State and public entities shall have the power to oversee the physical and moral well being of the family, particularly mothers and infants. Article 19. Parents have the right and the duty to raise their children. They shall be supported in this duty by the State and by public entities.

Minors are protected by the State and public entities against exploitation and abandonment. The State sees to aged people. The State sees to the equality of opportunities for handicapped persons with a view to their promotion or their social reinsertion. Article 20. The home of every person is inviolable. A residence cannot be subject of search except under forms and conditions specified by law. Article 21. Each person has the right to own property. No one can be deprived of his or her property except when needed for public use, and, then, only when compensated fairly in advance. Article 22. The secrecy of correspondence and communication shall be guaranteed under conditions defined by law. Article 23. Each person has the right to freedom of thought, of opinion, of expression, of conscience, of religion, and of worship. The State guarantees the free exercise of worship and expression of beliefs. These rights shall be applicable in regard to public order, social tranquility, and national unity. Article 24. The State recognizes and guarantees the right of coming and going, and freedoms of association, of assembly, of procession, and of demonstration, under conditions specified by law. Article 25. The State shall recognize the right of all citizens to work and to strive to create conditions which promote the enjoyment of this right and which guarantee to each worker fair compensation for his goods or services. Article 26.

The State recognizes and guarantees the right of labor to organize and to strike, according to conditions established by laws and regulations. Article 27. Each person has the right to a healthy environment. The State shall be charged with protecting the environment. The stockpiling, moving and evacuation of toxic wastes, whether pollutants from factories or from other industrial or crafts organizations situated on national property, are regulated by law. The transit, importation, stockpiling, burial, dumping on the national territory of toxic wastes or foreign pollutants as well as any agreement concerning it constitute a crime against the Nation punishable by law. Article 28. The defense of the Nation and of the integrity of the territory of the Republic is a sacred duty of all Nigerian citizens. Military service is obligatory. Conditions for fulfilling this duty are determined by law. Article 29. Every Nigerian citizen, whether civilian or in the military, has the sacred duty to respect the Constitution and the legal order of the Republic under all circumstances. Article 30. Citizens have the duty to work for the common good, to fulfill civic and professional obligations, and to fulfill responsibilities involving fiscal contributions. Article 31. Public assets are sacred and inviolable. Every person shall respect and protect them scrupulously. Any act of sabotage, vandalism, corruption, misappropriation, waste or illegal enrichment shall be restrained by law. Article 32. The State protects the rights and legitimate interests of Nigerian citizens beyond its borders. Article 33.

The State has the duty to assure the diffusion and the teaching of the Constitution as well as the Rights of the human person and the fundamental liberties. A National Commission will see to the promotion and effectiveness of the rights and freedoms above mentioned, should the occasion arise, according to the international agreements signed by Niger. A law will establish the modalities of the organization and of functioning of this commission. Article 34. Rights and duties proclaimed above and guaranteed by the present Constitution shall bind legislative, executive and judicial powers in regard to each person, by virtue of the law that is directly applicable. Article 35. All rights and liberties shall be exercised in regard to laws and regulations in force TITLE III EXECUTIVE POWER Article 36. The President of the Republic is the Head of State. He incarnates the national unity. The President of the Republic is above political parties. The President is the guarantor of national independence, national unity, territorial integrity, respect for the Constitution, and treaties and international agreements. He assures the proper functioning of the public powers and the continuity of the State. Article 37. The President of the Republic is elected for five (5) years by free, direct, equal and secret universal suffrage. The President is re-eligible only once. Any native-born Nigerian who is at least 40 years old and who possesses civil and political rights is eligible for the Presidency of the Republic. The law specifies [précise] the conditions of eligibility, of the presentation of the candidatures, the conduct of the ballot, the tabulation and the proclamation of the results.

The Supreme Court supervises the regularity of these operations and proclaims the definitive results. Article 38. Election of the President of the Republic is by absolute majority vote in two rounds. Convocation of voters is by decree of the Council of Ministers. The first round of voting for President of the Republic takes place at least thirty (30) days and no later than forty (40) days before expiration of the term of the current President. A candidate who achieves an absolute majority of votes in the first round shall be declared winner of the election. If this condition is not met, there shall be a second round of voting no later than twenty one (21) days after the first between the two candidates who led the vote during the first round. In the case of the death, of withdrawal or of incapacity [empêchment] of either of the two candidates the remaining candidates shall be presented in the order of their placement after the first round. In the case of the death of the two (2) candidates, the electoral operations of the first round will be repeated. The candidate having obtained the largest number of votes in the second round of voting is declared elected. Article 39. The term of the new President of the Republic takes effect the same day that the term of his predecessor expires. Article 40. Before taking office, the President of the Republic takes the following oath before the Supreme Court and in the presence of the National Assembly: "Before God and before the sovereign Nigerian people, I [Nous], ------------, the President of the Republic, elected in accordance with the law, solemnly swear on my honor: — to respect and to demand respect for the Constitution that the people have freely created for themselves; — to fulfill loyally the important duties which are vested in me;

— never to betray or to travesty the aspirations of the People; — to respect and defend the republican form of the State; — to preserve territorial integrity and national unity; — to respect and to defend the rights and liberties of all citizens; — neither to take nor to allow to be taken any measure that debases human dignity; — to see to the neutrality of administration and to the observation of the principles of equity and of continuity. — to work untiringly for the people's welfare; — to spare no effort to realize African unity; — and above all, to conduct myself as the faithful and loyal servant of the People. If I perjure myself, I shall be submitted to the rigors of the law." This oath is made to the President of the Supreme Court. Article 41. Within forty-eight (48) hours after the investiture ceremony, the President of the Supreme Court receives publicly a declaration of the assets of the President of the Republic, written on his honor. This declaration shall be subject of a similar revelation both annually on the same date and upon completion of his duties. The initial declaration of assets and said annual reports are published in the Official Journal. The copy of the declaration of the President of the Republic is communicated to the Fiscal Services. Differences between the initial declaration and the annual updates must be duly justified. The Supreme Court has full power of valuation [appréciation] in this area [domaine] . Article 42. During his tenure, the President of the Republic shall not, either through another or by himself, purchase or lease anything that belongs to the State or its subdivisions. The President shall not take part, either through another or by himself, in public or private sales of the State or of its subdivisions.

Article 43. In case of the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic by death, resignation or other absolute incapacity [empêchment], the functions of President of the Republic are provisionally exercised by the President of the National Assembly, and if the latter is incapacitated, by the Vice-Presidents of the National Assembly, in their order of precedence. For the mental or physical incapacity of the President to be considered absolute, it must make him unable to exercise the duties [charges] of his function. Equally considered absolute incapacity is the refusal by the President of the Republic to comply with a judgement of the Supreme Court establishing a violation by him of the provisions of this Constitution. Absolute incapacity is declared by the Supreme Court, seized by the Bureau of the National Assembly, ruling by a majority of two-thirds (2/3) of its members. In case of death, vacancy is declared by the Supreme Court, seized by the Prime Minister or a member of the government. In case of resignation, the vacancy is declared by the Supreme Court seized by the resigning President of the Republic. The vacating of the Presidency shall be followed by new Presidential elections no sooner than forty-five (45) days and no later than ninety (90) days after the vacancy occurs. When the President of the National Assembly assures the interim of the President of the Republic under the conditions specified in the paragraphs above, he cannot, except by resignation on his part or by renunciation of the interim, present himself [as] candidate for presidential elections. He exercises the powers [attributions] conferred on the President of the Republic with the exception of those specified in Articles 49, 51, paragraph 2, 52, 53, 118, 122 and 123. In case of the resignation of the President of the National Assembly or his renunciation of the interim, the interim of the President of the Republic is assured by the Vice-Presidents of the National Assembly in order of precedence. In case of impeachment of the President of the Republic before the High Court of Justice, his interim is assured by the President of the National Assembly who exercises all the functions of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those mentioned in paragraph 8 of this article. Article 44.

In case of the absence of the President of the Republic from the country, or illness, or holiday, the Prime Minister acts as interim President within the limit of powers delegated to him. Article 45. The functions of the President of the Republic are incompatible with the exercise of any other elected position, with any other public, civil or military employment, and with any other professional activity. During his mandate, the President of the Republic cannot be president or a member of the directive organ of a political party or of any national association. Article 46. The President of the Republic is the holder of the executive power. He is the Chief of the Government. He appoints the Prime Minister and the members of the Government and defines their functions [attributions]. The Prime Minister and the members of the Government are responsible before him. He terminates their functions. Article 47. The President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers deliberates on : — decisions determining the general policy of the State; — bills of law; — ordinances and regulatory decrees; — appointments to the following offices: Members of the Supreme Court, the High Chancellor of the National Orders, the General Officers, the Chief of State-Major General [Chef d’Etat-Major Général] of the Armies and his Assistant [Adjoint] , the High Commander of the National Police and his Assistant, the High Commander of the National Forces of Intervention and Security [Forces Nationale d’intervention et sécurité] and his Assistant, the Inspector General of the National Armed Forces, the Ambassadors and the Extraordinary Envoys, the Governors and their Assistants, the Prefects and Under-Prefects and their Assistants, the Chiefs of Administrative Posts, the General Secretaries of the Prefecture and their Assistants, the General Secretaries of the Ministries and their Assistants, the Directors of Central Administrations, the General Directors of Societies of State and of Public Establishments;

— appointments to offices for which this procedure is specified by a legislative or regulatory provision. Article 48. The President of the Republic has the initiative of law, concurrently with the members of the National Assembly. He promulgates the law within fifteen (15) days following the transmission which has been made to him by the President of the National Assembly. This time limit is reduced to five (5) days in case of urgency declared by the National Assembly. In default of promulgation with these time limits, the law is promulgated by right and enters into force with its publication in the Official Gazette, after a ruling on the expiration of the time limits by the Supreme Court seized by the President of the National Assembly. The publication in the Official Gazette is made according to the procedure of urgency. The President of the Republic can, before the expiration of these time periods, demand of the National Assembly a second deliberation of the law or certain of its articles. This deliberation cannot be refused. The vote on this second deliberation is taken by an absolute majority of the members composing the National Assembly and the law is promulgated by right and enters into effect with its publication in the Official Gazette following the procedure of urgency. Article 49. The President of the Republic can, after consultation of the President of the National Assembly and of the President of the Supreme Court, submit to referendum any text that he believes requires the direct consultation of the People, with the exception of any revision of the present Constitution which remains governed by the procedure specified in Title XIII. After the bill is adopted by referendum, the President of the Republic promulgates it within the time specified in Article 48 paragraph 3. Article 50. The President of the Republic accredits Ambassadors and Special Envoys [Envoyés Extraordinaires] in the service of foreign powers. The Ambassadors and Special Envoys are accredited to him.

Article 51. The President of the Republic is the Chief of the Administration. He oversees the administration and appoints the civil servants of the State. Article 52. The President of the Republic is the Chief of the Armed Forces. He appoints the military posts of the State. He oversees the Armed Force. He is responsible for the National Defense. Article 53. When the institutions of the Republic, the Nation's independence, its territorial integrity or the execution of international obligations are threatened by a grave and immediate danger and when the normal functioning of the Constitutional public powers has been interrupted, the President of the Republic takes exceptional measures strictly required by the circumstances after consulting with the President of the National Assembly and the President of the Supreme Court. He informs the Nation by a message. The National Assembly meets by right if it is not in session. These measures must be motivated [inspirées] by the will to assure to the Constitutional public powers the means to accomplish their mission within the shortest period of time. The National Assembly evaluates [apprécier] the period of the exercise of exceptional powers. It terminates it in case of abuse. Article 54. The President of the Republic proclaims, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, a state of urgency under conditions specified [déterminées] by law. Article 55. The President of the Republic has the right of pardon. Article 56. The President of the Republic determines and carries out the Policy of the Nation. Article 57.

The President of the Republic exercises the regulatory power. In this role, he assures the execution of the laws and decisions of justice and makes regulations applicable to the whole of the territory of the Republic. Article 58. The President of the Republic can delegate certain of his powers to the Prime Minister and to the Ministers. The Prime Minister is charged with coordinating the governmental action; he exercises his functions [attributions] within the framework [cadre] of the powers that are delegated to him by the President of the Republic. The Government is accountable for its management and for its activities to the National Assembly, at its demand. Article 59. Before beginning their term in office, the members of the Government must deliver to the President of the Supreme Court a sworn declaration of their wealth. This declaration shall be reviewed annually and upon cessation of their duties. The initial declaration of their wealth and all annual reviews shall be published in the Official Journal. Provisions of Articles 41, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, and 42 also apply to members of the Government. The law shall determine which other public agents shall be required to declare their wealth, as well as those means by which it shall be declared. Article 60. The duties of members of the Government are incompatible with the exercise of any other parliamentary authority, with professional representation on a local or national scale, with public employ, and with all other professional activity. Article 61. Every year, on the anniversary of his investiture, the President of the Republic addresses a message to the National Assembly about the general state of the country. He may equally, at any time, communicate with the National Assembly either directly, or through messages that he has the President of the National Assembly read and which may not be debated.

Article 62. The law determines benefits to be accorded to the President of the Republic and establishes methods of paying pensions to previous Presidents of the Republic who are enjoying their civic rights. TITLE IV LEGISLATIVE POWER Article 63. The legislative power is exercised by two (2) chambers : — the National Assembly whose members carry the title of "Deputies." — the second chamber whose name and the title of members will be determined by the law. Section I : The National Assembly Article 64. Deputies are elected by universal, free, direct, equal and secret ballot. The legislative term is five (5) years. General elections regarding reconvening the Assembly shall be no fewer than ten (10) days and no more than twenty (20) days before the conclusion of the previous legislature. The number of members of the National Assembly, their compensation, conditions of eligibility, regulation of eligibility and incompatibility, and methods of election, as well as conditions which determine the organization of new elections in case of vacancies in Deputies' seats, are fixed by law. Article 65. The Supreme Court rules on the eligibility of candidates. The Supreme Court likewise validates the election of Deputies. Article 66. Each Deputy is the representative of the Nation. Any imperative mandate is void.

Each Deputy's Right to vote is personal. However, a proxy vote is permitted when a Deputy is absent because of illness, a religious or military obligation or a mission conferred by the Government or by the Assembly, or when fulfilling military obligations. No one can receive more than one proxy vote Article 67. Members of the National Assembly enjoy parliamentary immunity. No Deputy may be prosecuted, searched, arrested, detained or judged because of his opinions or voting record in the exercise of his duties. When the National Assembly is in session, no Deputy can be prosecuted or arrested on a correctional or criminal matter except upon authorization of the National Assembly, and then only in the case of a flagrant offense. When the National Assembly is not in session, a Deputy can be arrested only upon authorization of the administrative Bureau of the National Assembly, and then only in the case of a flagrant offense, under an authorized prosecution or final judgement. The suspension of the detention of or proceedings against a Deputy requires a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the National Assembly. Article 68. The function of Deputy gives the right to a retirement pension, contingent on completion of two (2) parliamentary mandates, with possibility of redeeming [racher] the last tenth of it. The conditions for this retirement pension will be determined by the law. Article 69. The National Assembly is directed by a President assisted by a Bureau. The President and the Members of the Bureau are elected under the conditions specified by the internal regulation. The President is elected for the duration of the legislature. Other administrative officers shall be elected each year. Whenever the President of the National Assembly assumes interim authority for the President of the Republic, under conditions specified by Article 43 of the present Constitution, he shall be replaced in his duties according to Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly.

In case the Presidency of the Assembly is vacated due to death, resignation or any other cause, the Assembly shall elect a new President within fifteen (15) days following said vacancy, if the Assembly is in session. If the National Assembly is not in session, it shall reconvene according to conditions specified by rule of procedure, without need of sanction. Article 70. The National Assembly has the authority to establish law and to authorize taxes. It shall control the conduct [action] of the Government. Article 71. The National Assembly meets of right in two (2) ordinary sessions each year upon convocation by its President. The first session is opened the first week in March and cannot exceed ninety (90) days. The second session, i.e. the budgetary, opens the first week of the month of October and cannot exceed sixty (60) days. Article 72. The National Assembly is convened into extraordinary session by its President on a determined agenda upon the request of the Prime Minister or of two-fifths (2/5) of the Deputies. Such extraordinary sessions, outside of those held without need of sanction, are opened or closed by decree of the President of the Republic. Sessions conclude when the agenda is exhausted. Extraordinary sessions cannot last more than fifteen (15) days. Article 73. The sessions of the National Assembly are public. Minutes of proceedings of debates are published in the Official Journal. Upon the request of the President of the Republic or of one-third (1/3) of the Deputies, the assembly may sit in closed session. Article 74. The work of the National Assembly proceeds according to Rules of Procedure adopted by the Assembly in conformity to the Constitution.

Rules of Procedure determine, in particular: — the composition and operational rules of its administrative officers, as well as the powers and prerogatives of its President; — the number, manner of selection, composition, role and competence of its permanent committees as well as special temporary committees; — the creation of parliamentary commissions of inquiry within the framework of regulation of governmental action; — the organization of administrative services directed by a General Secretary under the authority of the President of the National Assembly; — the different kinds of election, excluding those expressly identified by this Constitution; — the conditions covering the right of interpellation as well as the rules applying to written and oral questioning. Section II : The Second Chamber Article 75. The Second Chamber participates in the exercise of the legislative power. Its members are elected by indirect suffrage. Article 76. An Organic Law will determine the composition, the organization, the attributions, the functioning, the name of the chamber and its members, as well as its relations with the other institutions of the State. TITLE V RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE POWERS Article 77. The National Assembly informs the President of the Republic and the Government of its agendas for sessions and meetings, as well as of those of its committees. The agenda includes with priority the examination of the bills of law presented by the government. Article 78.

The members of the Government have access to the plenary session and to the committees of the National Assembly. They are heard at their [the committees’] demand or on their own demand. They can be assisted by their collaborators.. Article 79. The Prime Minister or any other member of the Government can, in the exercise of their functions, be interpellated by the National Assembly. On such occasion, the National Assembly makes recommendations to the Government. Article 80. The law establishes rules concerning the following: — citizenship, civic rights and fundamental guarantees for the exercise of public liberties; — the taxes imposed upon the person and their assets of citizens for purposes of national Defense and public Security; — the nationality, status, and capacity of persons, the matrimonial regimes, inheritance, and gifts [liberalités]; — the procedure for authentication of customs and bringing them into harmony with the fundamental principles of the Constitution; — the determination of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as applicable penalties, penal procedures and amnesty; — the organization of jurisdictions of all judicial orders and of the procedure to be followed before these jurisdictions, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction, and statutes for magistrates, ministerial officers and auxiliaries of justice; — the tax base, interest rates and methods for collecting taxes of all kinds; — the system for issuing money; — the referendum; — the electoral system regarding the President of the Republic, members of the National Assembly, and local assemblies; — the creation of categories of public establishments;

— nationalization of various enterprises and transfers of business property from the public sector to the private sector; — general Civil Service regulations; — general regulations for military personnel, public security police and similar forces; — general regulations regarding traditional districts [chefferie traditionelle] ; — general regulations regarding the opposition; — general regulations regarding parliamentarians; — the general organization of the Administration; — the territorial organization, and the creation and modification of administrative districts as well as the creation of electoral districts; — the state of siege and the state of urgency. Article 81. The law determines the following fundamental principles: — the organization of the national Defense; — the free administration of the territorial collectivities, their competences and their resources; — education and scientific research; — health; — the protection of the family; — the protection of the environment and the conservation of natural resources; — the protection, conservation and organization of space; — the protection of the cultural patrimony; — the regime of property, material rights, and civil and commercial obligations; — the right of work, of social security, and the right to organize labor unions, and the right to strike;

— the alienation of property and fiscal administration of the domain of the State; — the insurance and savings industries; — regulation of transportation, postal services, and telecommunications; — auditing of public property; — the penal regime; — the housing policy; — the lease and rentals code. Article 82. The Finance bill determines the manner of regulation of the State's public resources and of its expenses. Planning laws indicate the objectives of the economic and social action of the State.. Regulatory laws sanction the execution of the State's budget. Article 83. Matters other than those considered within the domain of law are of a regulatory nature. Texts of a legislative nature relating to these matters which were passed before this Constitution goes into effect can be modified by decree upon the advice of the Supreme Court. Article 84. The declaration of war and the sending of troops abroad are authorized by the National Assembly. Article 85. A state of siege is decreed in the Council of Ministers. The National Assembly reconvenes of right if it is not in session. Prolongation of a state of siege beyond fifteen (15) days cannot be authorized except by the National Assembly. Article 86.

The President of the Republic can, in order to execute his program, request from the National Assembly its authorization to order by decree(s), for a limited time, those measures that are normally within the domain of the law. This authorization takes the form of a law of habilitation. The ordinances are adopted in the Council of Ministers upon the advice of the Supreme Court as the case may be. They come into effect following their publication but become null if they are not ratified by the National Assembly prior to the date established by the law of habilitation. At the expiration of the time period mentioned in the first paragraph of this Article, ordinances cannot be modified except by an appropriate law already in the domain of the law. Article 87. The Deputies have the right of amendment. Article 88. Proposals, bills and amendments that are not within the domain of the law are unacceptable. The unacceptability is expressed by the President of the National Assembly. In case of dispute, the Supreme Court, seized by the Prime Minister or by the President of the National Assembly decides within eight (8) days. Article 89. Proposals and amendments filed by the deputies are not acceptable if their adoption would entail a diminution of public resources, either by the creation or aggravation of a public expense, unless they are accompanied by a plan for increasing public receipts or by equivalent economic gains. Article 90. The discussion of draft bills follows the text as presented by the competent Committee of the National Assembly. At the request of the Government, the Committee brings to the attention of the National Assembly the points of a bill with which the Government is not in accord. Article 91. The National Assembly passes Finance bills within conditions established by the law.

Article 92. The National Assembly takes up the Finance bill from the opening of the budget session. The Finance bill shall include the essential receipts for the integral coverage of expenses. The National Assembly votes a balanced budget. If the National Assembly has not expressed itself within sixty (60) days after a bill is presented, the provisions of that bill can be put into effect by ordinance. In order for the Finance bill to be ratified, it must be presented by the Government to an extraordinary session of the National Assembly within fifteen (15) days. If the National Assembly has not passed the budget by the conclusion of its extraordinary session, the budget is definitively adopted by ordinance. If the Finance bill is not passed in time to be promulgated before the beginning of the fiscal year, the President of the Republic immediately requests, as a matter of urgency, that the National Assembly grant him authorization to recover part of the budget by adding one-twelfth (1/12) to the budget of the preceding year. Article 93. The National Assembly regulates the Nation's accounting according to methods contained in the Finance bill. The regulatory law must imperatively intervene at the latest [on] the 31 of December of the second year following the execution of the budget. The National Assembly can charge to the Chamber of accounts and budgetary discipline of the Supreme Court any inquiries and studies concerning the execution of public receipts and expenses. TITLE VI CONTROL OVER THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF LAWS Article 94. The organic laws before their promulgation, the internal regulations of the National Assembly, of the Second Chamber, of the Economic, Social and Cultural Council, and the Superior Council of Communication, before their entry into effect [mise en application] must be submitted to the Supreme Court which pronounces on their conformity to the Constitution. To the same end, laws may be deferred to the Supreme Court before their promulgation by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly or by a vote of

one-tenth (1/10) of the Deputies, the President of the Second Chamber or a tenth (1/10) of its members. In cases covered by the preceding paragraphs, the Supreme Court shall announce its ruling within fifteen (15) days . However, at the demand of the Government, if there is urgency, the time period is reduced to five (5) days. In the same cases, the seizing of the Supreme Court suspends the period for promulgation. Article 95. Any person who is party to a proceedings can raise the unconstitutionality of a law before any jurisdiction, by way of exception, at the occasion of an instance in progress. The jurisdiction seized, must stay its judgment until the decision of the Supreme Court, which must occur [intervenir] within 30 days from the day of its seizing. Any provision declared unconstitutional through the application of the preceding paragraph becomes lapsed [caduques] of right and cannot be applied to the proceedings in progress, including before the judge of cassation. The decision [arrêt] of the Supreme Court establishing this unconstitutionality is published in the Official Journal. TITLE VII JUDICIAL POWER Article 96. The judicial power is independent from the legislative power and the executive power. It is exercised by the Supreme Court, the courts and tribunals created in accordance with this Constitution. Article 97. Justice is rendered on the national territory in the name of the People and in strict accordance with rule of law as well as with the rights and liberties of every citizen. Decisions of justice are imposed upon all, upon the public powers as well as on citizens. They may only be criticized by the means and under the forms authorized by the law. Article 98. In the exercise of their functions, the judges are only subject to the authority of the law.

The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the judiciary. He is assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistrature. Article 99. Magistrates of courts of justice are named by the President of the Republic upon the motion of the Minister of Justice, Guardian of the Seals of State, at the advice of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. Magistrates of the public prosecutor’s department [magistrats du parquet] are appointed by the President of the Republic upon the motion of the Minister of Justice, Guardian of the Seals. Magistrates of courts of justice are irremovable. Article 100. The law establishes the composition, the organization, the powers [attributions] and the functioning of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. Section I : The Supreme Court Article 101. The Supreme Court is the highest jurisdiction of the State. The Supreme Court comprises four (4) chambers: the Constitutional Chamber, the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative Chamber, and the Chamber of Accounts and Budgetary Discipline. Article 102. The Supreme Court decides on : — the constitutionality of laws, in the conditions described [énoncée] in articles 94 and 95 of the present Constitution; — the regulatory acts affecting [porter atteinte] the fundamental rights of the human person and the public liberties; — the conflicts of power [attribution] between the institutions of State; It sees to the regularity of presidential, legislative and local elections. It examines claims, rules in a general manner on the contentions of presidential, legislative and local

elections, and proclaims the results of the ballots. It rules on the regularity of the referendum and proclaims the results. Article 103. The Supreme Court interprets the provisions of the Constitution. It is seized, to this effect, by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly or one tenth (1/10th) of the Deputies, the President of the Second Chamber or one tenth (1/10th) of its members. Article 104. The decisions of the Supreme Court are not susceptible to any recourse. They bind the public powers and all the administrative, civil, military and judicial authorities. Article 105. An organic law specifies the composition, organization, functioning and other attributions of the Supreme Court. Section II : The High Court of Justice Article 106. The High Court of Justice is composed of Deputies that the National Assembly elects from within after each general renewal. It must be established no later than during the 2nd ordinary session of the 1st year of the legislature. The High Court of Justice shall elect its President from among its members. The number of members, rules of operation, and procedures to be followed before the High Court of Justice shall be established by law. Article 107. The President of the Republic shall not be held responsible for acts committed in the exercise of his duties except in the case of high treason. Judgement in any case shall be by the High Court of Justice. It shall be considered high treason if the President of the Republic violates his oath, or is known as author, co-author or accomplice to a serious violation of human rights or to a fraudulent transfer of any section of the national territory. Should the President of the Republic be found guilty of a crime of high treason, he shall be immediately stripped of office.

The High Court is competent to judge members of the Government regarding deeds which may be crimes or misdemeanors in the exercise of their functions, excepting crimes and misdemeanors against the security of the State as well as connected crimes and offenses. Article 108. The impeachment of the President of the Republic is passed by public ballot by a majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the Deputies comprising the National Assembly. The impeachment of members of the Government requires a vote of simple majority, under the same conditions. Article 109. The High Court is bound by the legal definition of crimes and misdemeanors and by penalties incorporated in penal laws which are in force at the time of the acts alleged in the proceedings. TITLE VIII ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL COUNCIL Article 110. The Economic, Social and Cultural Council assists the President of the Republic and the National Assembly. This Council gives advice on questions submitted to it by the President of the or the National Assembly. Article 111. The Economic, Social and Cultural Council is competent to examine draft bills and proposals for laws of an economic or social character, with the exclusion of Financial bills. The Council is obligatorily called upon [saisi] for advise on all bills relating to the economic and social programs and plan. It can be called upon on all problems of interest to the economic and social life of the Nation. The Council can, on its own initiative, be qualified to undertake studies and inquiries relating to economic, social or cultural issues. Its reports are transmitted to the President of the Republic for all useful ends.

Article 112. An organic law establishes the composition, organization and operation of the Economic, Social and Cultural Council. The composition of the Council shall take into account the concerns of an adequate representation of the regions and of civil society. TITLE IX THE SUPERIOR COUNCIL OF COMMUNICATIONS Article 113. The Superior Council of Communications is an administrative authority independent of any political power. Article 114. The Council has the mission to assure and to guarantee the freedom and independence of audiovisual communications and the print media with respect to the law. It sees to the respect of ethical procedures [déontologie] in matters of information and to the equitable and effective access of citizens, of associations and of political parties to official means of information and communication, within the conditions specified by the law. Article 115. The composition, organization, attributions and the functioning of the Superior Council of Communication is established by an organic law. TITLE X TERRITORIAL COLLECTIVITIES Article 116. The administration of territories shall be based on principles of decentralization and deconcentration. The Territorial Collectivities are created by the organic law. The law determines the fundamental principles of the free administration of Territorial Collectivities, their competences and their resources. Article 117.

The State shall see to the harmonious development of all Territorial Collectivities on the basis of national solidarity, regional potential, and inter-regional equilibrium. TITLE XI TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS Article 118. The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies Treaties and International Agreements. Article 119. Treaties of defense and of peace, treaties and agreements relating to international organizations which modify internal laws of State and which bring financial engagements to the State cannot be ratified except according to a law. Article 120. If the Supreme Court, upon instigation by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, or one tenth (1/10) of the deputies, finds that an international commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify cannot take place except after the revision of the Constitution. Article 121. The treaties and agreements which are properly ratified have, upon their publication, an authority superior to that of laws, subject to their application by the other party. TITLE XII COOPERATION AND ASSOCIATION WITH STATES Article 122. The Republic of Niger can conclude with any other African State agreements of association or of community which carry partial or total surrender of sovereignty in view of realizing African unity. The Republic of Niger can conclude agreements of cooperation and of partnership with other States on the basis of rights and reciprocal advantages. It accepts to create with other States of organisms of intergovernmental organizations common management, coordination and free cooperation. These organisms can have these special goals:

— the harmonization of economic, financial and monetary policy; — the establishment of unions which pursue economic integration through the promotion of production and trade; — the creation of funds for solidarity; — the harmonization of plans for development; — the harmonization of foreign polices; — the cooperation in judicial matters — the cooperation in matters of defense; — the cooperation in health matters — the cooperation in cultural, scientific and technical matters; — the coordination of transportation, communications and telecommunications; — the cooperation in matters of combating natural disasters; — the enhancement of the value of natural resources; — the defense of the environment. TITLE XIII ON REVISION Article 123. The initiative for the revision of the Constitution belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic and to the members of the National Assembly. Article 124. To be placed in consideration, the bill or the proposition for revision must be voted by a majority of three-quarters (3/4) of the members composing the National Assembly. The revision is adopted [acquérir] if the bill or proposition concerned has been approved by a majority of four-fifths (4/5) of the members composing the National Assembly. In default, the bill or proposition is submitted to referendum. Article 125.

No procedure for revising the Constitution can be activated or pursued if it carries with it a threat to the Nation's territorial integrity. The republican form of State, the principle of the separation of Church and State, and the multipartyism cannot be the object of any revision of the Constitution. TITLE XIV TRANSITORY AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 126. The present Constitution will be adopted by referendum. It will enter into force upon its promulgation by the President of the Council of National Salvation [Conseil de Salut National] in the eight (8) days following the proclamation of th results of the referendum by the Supreme Court. Article 127. The Council of National Salvation, the Council of Sages [Conseil des Sages] and the Government of the transition continue to exercise their responsibilities [charges] until new authorities have begun their official functions. While waiting for the effective functioning of the Second Chamber, the National Assembly exercises the whole of the legislative power. The Superior Council of Communication, formerly dissolved by the terms of the Proclamation of 27 January 1996, is rehabilitated for the transition period and exercises its activities until the installation of a new Council. Article 128. Ordinance 96-001 of 30 January 1996, concerning the organization of the public powers during the period of transition remains in force until the new authorities begin their functions Article 129. The legislation currently in force remains applicable, except by express abrogation, provided that it contains nothing contrary to the present Constitution. The organic laws and the other laws of application specified by the present Constitution must obligatorily be adopted in the two first years of the first legislature, at least. Article 130.

The provisions necessary for the entry into force of the present Constitution shall be the object either of ordinances or decrees taken in the Council of Ministers.

