Nigeria (Constitution)

	

2391
Section 2.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE	

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERATION OF NIGERIA
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
CHAPTER I THE FEDERATION AND ITS TERRITORIES
Section

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Effect of this constitution. Establishment of the Federation. Territories of the Federation. Alteration of this Constitution. Provisions relating to Regional constitutions. Interpretation.
CHAPTER II CITIZENSHIP

7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.

Persons who become citizens on 1st October, 1960. Persons entitled to be registered as citizens. Persons naturalized or registered before 1st October, 1960. Persons born in Nigeria after 30th September, 1960. Persons born outside Nigeria after 30th September, 1960. Dual citizenship. Commonwealth citizens. Criminal liability of Commonwealth citizens. Powers of Parliament. Interpretation.
CHAPTER III FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

17. Deprivation of life. 18. Inhuman treatment. 19. Slavery and forced labour. 20. Deprivation of personal liberty. 21. Determination of rights. 22. Private and family life. 23. Freedom of conscience. 24. Freedom of expression. 25. Peaceful assembly and association. 26. Freedom of movement. 27. Freedom from discrimination. 28 28. Derogations from fundamental rights. 29. Reference to tribunal in certain cases. Compulsory acquisition of property. I Special jurisdiction of High Courts in relation to this Chapter. Interpretation.
CHAPTER IV THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL 33.
33. Establishment of office of Governor-General. 34. Oaths to be taken by Governor-General. 35. Discharge of Governor-General's functions during vacancy, etc.

2392

	

NIGERIA CHAPTER V PARLIAMENT

Part'1 Composition of Parliament Section 36. Establishment of Parliament. 37. Composition of Senate. 38. Composition of House of Representatives. 39. Qualifications for membership of Parliament. 40. Disqualifications for membership of Parliament, etc. 41. President of Senate. 42. Speaker of House of Representatives. 43. Right of attendance of Ministers. 44. Tenure of seats of members of Parliament. 45. Establishment of Electoral Commission. 46. Constituencies. 47. Elections. 48. Determination of questions respecting membership of Parliament. 49. Clerks to Houses of Parliament and their staffs. Part 2 Procedure in Parliament 50. Oaths to be taken by members of Parliament. 51. Presiding in Senate. 52. Presiding in House of Representatives. 53. Quorum in Houses of Parliament. 54. Use of English in Parliament. 55. Voting in Parliament. 56. Unqualified persons sittingor voting. 57. Mode of exercising legislative power. 58. Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures. 59. Limitation of powers of Senate. 60. Regulation of procedure in Houses of Parliament. 61. Interpretation. Part 3 Summoning, prorogation and dissolution 62. Sessions of Parliament. 63. Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament. Part 4 Legislative powers 64. Powers of Parliament to make laws. 65. Special powers of Parliament in relation to emergencies. 66. Special powers of Parliament when s. 80 of this Constitution has been contravened. 67. Powers of Parliament conferred by Regional law. 68. Powers to make grants of money, etc. for any purpose. 69. Implementation of treaties, etc. 70. Income tax and estate duty. 71. Trade and commerce. 72. Banks and banking. 73. Electricity and gas. 74. Authorities empowered to administer trusts and estates. 75. Exhibition of cinematograph films. 76. Exemption from Regional taxes with respect to mining. 77. Evidence.

Nigeria (Constitution)	
CHAPTER VI

2393

Executive POWERS Section 78. Exercise of executive authority of Federation. 79. Extent of executive authority of Federation. 80. Executive authority of Regions. 81. Ministers of Government of Federation. 82. Establishment of Council of Ministers. 83. Collective responsibility. 84. Allocation of portfolios to Ministers. 85. Performance of functions of Prime Minister during absence or illness. 86. Exercise of Governor-General's powers. 87. Governor-General to be informed concerning matters of government. 88. Parliamentary Secretaries. 89. Oaths to be taken by Ministers, etc. 90. Permanent secretaries. 91. Constitution of offices for Federation, etc. 92. Delegation of executive authority of Federation. 93. Delegation of executive authority of Region. 94. Prerogative of mercy. 95. Establishment of Advisory Council on Prerogative of Mercy. 96. Functions of Advisory Council. 97. Public prosecutions.
CHAPTER VII POLICE

98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103.

Establishment of Nigeria Police Force. Control of Nigeria Police Force. Establishment of Nigeria Police Council. Functions of Nigeria Police Council. Establishment of Police Service Commission. Appointments to Nigeria Police Force, etc.
CHAPTER VIII

Comas
Part 1 The Federal Supreme Court 104. Establishment of Federal Supreme Court. 105, Appointment of Chief Justice of Federation and Federal Justices. 106. Tenure of office of Chief Justice of Federation and Federal Justices. 107. Original jurisdiction of Federal Supreme Court. 108. Questions as to interpretation of this Constitution. 110. 109. Advisory jurisdiction of Federal Supreme Court. . Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from High Courts. 111.	 Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from other Federal courts, etc. Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from Sharia Court of Appeal and Court of Resolution. 1 3. Powers, practice and procedure of Federal Supreme Court
1

Part 2 Appeals to Her Majesty, in Council I I I A meals from Federal Supreme Court to Her Majesty in Council.

2394	

NIGERIA

Part 3 The High Court of the Federal Territory Section 115. Establishment of High Court of Lagos. 116. Appointment of judges of High Court of Lagos. 117. Tenure of office of judges of High Court of Lagos. 118. Appeals to High Court of Lagos from subordinate courts. Part 4 General 119. Establishment of courts. 120. Establishment of Judicial Service Commission. 121. Appointment, etc. of officers connected with courts of Federation or Federal territory. 122. Oaths to be taken by judges.
CHAPTER IX FINANCE

123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129.

130. 131. 132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139.

Part 1 Public Funds of the Federation Establishment of Consolidated Revenue Fund. Authorization of expenditure from Consolidated Revenue Fund. Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation. Contingencies Fund. Remuneration of Governor-General and certain other officers. Audit of public accounts. Public debt. Part 2 Allocation of revenue Import duties on certain commodities. Import duties on motor spirit and tobacco. Excise duties. Export duties. Mining royalties and rents. Distribution of funds in Distributable Pool Account. Regions to contribute towards costs of administration. Set-off. Sums charged on Consolidated Revenue Funds. Provisions with regard to payments.
CHAPTER X THE PUBLIC SERVICE OF THE FEDERATION

140. 141. 142. 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. 148. 149.

Establishment of Public Service Commission. Appointment, etc. of officers in public service, Appointment, etc. of principal representatives of Federation abroad. Appointment, etc. of permanent secretaries. Qualifications of Director of Public Prosecutions. Tenure of office of Director of Public Prosecutions. Appointment and tenure of office of Director of Audit. Powers relating to Clerks of Houses of Parliament. Protection of pension rights. Powers of Public Service Commission in relation to grantof pensions, etc.

Nigeria (Constitution)
CHAPTER XI MISCELLANEOUS

	

2395

Sect ion 150. Powers and procedure of Federal Commissions. 151. Resignations. 152. Re-appointments, etc. 153. Review of ss. 134 and 135 of this Constitution. 154. Interpretation.
THE SCHEDULE THE LEGISLATIVE LISTS

Part I The Exclusive Legislative List Part II The Concurrent Legislative List Part Ill Interpretation
CHAPTER I THE FEDERATION AND ITS TERRITORIES Effect

of this Constitution

I. This Constitution shall have the force of law throughout Nigeria and, subject to the provisions of section 4 of this Constitution, if any other law (including the constitution of a Region) is inconsistent with this Constitution, this 'Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to to the extentbovheincstdfy,.
Establishment of the Federation
2.
territory.

The Federation of Nigeria shall consist of Regions and a Federal

Territories of the Federation

(1) There shall be three Regions, that is to say, Northern. (2) Western Nigeria and Eastern Nigeria. Nigeria , Pro- Northern Nigeria shall comprise those parts of the former tectorate of Nigeria that on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, were comprised in the Northern Region of Nigeria. (3 Western Nigeria shall comprise those parts of the former Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria that on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, were comprised in the Western Region of Nigeria. (4) Easter Nigeria shall comprise those parts of the former Protectorate of Nigeria that on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, were comprised in ,Eastern Region of Nigeria. (5) Federal territory shall comprise those parts of the former colony of Nigeria that on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, were comprised . i this n the Federal Territory of Lagos A lteration of constitution
4. (1) Parliament

stitution or (in so

may alter any of the provisions of this Confar as it forms part of the law of Nigeria) 'any of the Nigeria Independence Act, 1960(a)

2396	

NIGERIA

Provided that, in so far as it alters any of the provisions of this section, sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 17 to 33 inclusive, 36, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47, 57, 62 to 87 inclusive, 97 to 106 inclusive, 108, 110, 112, 114 to 118 inclusive, 120, 121, 123, 124, 127 to 141 inclusive, 145, 146, 148, 150 and the Schedule to this Constitution or (in so far as they apply to any of those provisions) sections 61 and 154 of this Constitution or any of the provisions of the Nigeria Independence Act, 1960, an Act of Parliament shall not come into operation unless each legislative house of at least two Regions has passed a resolution signifying consent to it having effect. (2) A bill for an Act of Parliament under this section, not being an Act to which subsection (3) of this section applies, shall not be passed in either House of Parliament unless it 'has been supported on second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of that House. (3) Alterations to section 3 of this Constitution for the purpose of establishing new Regions out of other territories shall be effected only in accordance with the following procedure (a) a proposal for the alteration shall be submitted to each House of Parliament and, if that proposal is approved by a resolution of each of those Houses supported by the votes of at least two-thirds of all the members of that House, the proposal shall then be submitted to the legislative houses of all the Regions ; and (b) if the proposal is approved(i) by a resolution of each legislative house 'of a majority of all the Regions ; or (ii) by a resolution of each legislative house of at least two Regions, including any Region comprising any part of Nigeria that would be transferred to the new Region under the proposal, Parliament may provide for the alteration. (4) Alterations to section 3 of this Constitution for the purpose of altering the boundaries of territories by the transfer of any part of one territory to another territory shall be effected only in accordance with the following procedure (a) a proposal for the alteration shall be submitted to each House of Parliament and, if that proposal is approved by a resolution of each of those Houses supported by the votes of at least two-third% of all 'the members of that House, the proposal shall then be submitted to the legislative houses of all the Regions ; and (b) if the proposal is approved(i) by a resolution 'of each legislative house of a majority of aII the Regions, including any Region to which any part of Nigeria comprised in another territory would be transferred under the proposal ; or (ii) by a resolution of each 'legislative house of each Region comprising any part of Nigeria that would be, transffered either to or from 'that Region under the proposal, Parliament may provide for the alteration: Provided that the procedure described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection need not be followed if the alteration is for the purpose of transferring an area of not more than one t housandsquare miles inhabited by not more than one hundred	 thousand persons from one Region to another Region 'or Regions.

(5) An Act of Parliament passed for the purposes of subsection (3) of this section or an Act of Parliament passed for the purposes of subsection (4) of this section, being an Act to effect an alteration in respect of which the procedure described in paragraphs (a) and (b) thereof is required to be followed, shall not come into operation unless (a) a resolution has been passed by each legislative house of at least two Regions signifying consent to its having effect ; and (b) a referendum upon the question whether the Act should have effect has been held in pursuance of provision made in that behalf by Parliament in every part of Nigeria that would be comprised in a new Region or transferred from one territory to another, as the case may be, at which the persons entitled to vote were the persons who at the date of the referendum were entitled to vote in any constituency in that part of Nigeria established under section 46 of this Constitution and at which at least three-fifths of all the persons who were entitled to vote at the referendum voted in favour of the Act. (6) An Act of Parliament passed for the purposes of subsection (4) of this section, being an Act to effect an alteration in respect of which the procedure described in paragraphs (a) and (b) thereof is not required to be followed, shall not come into operation unless a resolution has been passed by each legislative house of each Region whose boundaries are affected by the Act signifying consent to its having effect. (7) An Act of Parliament altering section 37 of this Constitution in relation to any Region in such a manner that that Region would be represented in the Senate by less than the appropriate proportion of Senators shall not come into operation unless a resolution has been passed by each legislative house of that Region signifying consent to its having effect. (8) An Act of Parliament altering section 38, 46 or 47 of this ConnsiretlaouyRgnschamertnubof members of the House of Representatives to be elected in that Region would be less than the appropriate proportion for that R pased egion shall not come into operation unless a resolution has been by each legislative house of that Region signifying consent to its having effect. (9) An Act of Parliament altering section 38, 46 or 47 of this Constitution in relation to the Federal territory in such a manner that the number of members of the House of Representatives to be elected in tha t territory. would be less than the appropriate proportion for that territory shall not come into operation unless a resolution supported by a majority of the members of that House who represent that terriroty has been passed by each House of Parliament signifying consent to its having effect. (10) The provisions of this Constitution or (in so far as it forms part of the law of Nigeria) the Nigeria independence Act, 1960, shall not be altered except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (11) "The appropriate proportion "— (a) for the purposes of subsection (7) of this section, means th e number obtained by dividing the total number of Senators repre -senting the Regions by the total number of Regions ; and 33001
212

2398	

NIGERIA

(b) for the purposes of subsections (8) and (9) of this section, means, in relation to a territory, such proportion of the total number of members of the House of Representatives as corresponds most nearly to the proportion borne by the number of inhabitants of that territory to the total number of inhabitants of Nigeria. (12) For the purposes of this section the number of inhabitants of Nigeria or a territory shall be ascertained by, reference to the latest census of the population of Nigeria held in pursuance of an Act of Parliament. Provisions relating to Regional constitutions 5.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and the Nigeria Independence Act, 1960, the constitution of each Region shall have the force of law throughout that Region and if any other law is inconsistent with that constitution, the provisions of that constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. (2) Subject to 'the provisions of this Constitution, the constitution of a Region may be altered only by a law enacted by the legislature of that Region. (3) A bill for a law to be enacted by the legislature of a Region altering any of the provisions of the constitution of that Region shall not be passed in any legislative house of that Region unless it has been supported on second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of that legislative house and shall not be presented to the Governor of the Region for assent unless it has been passed by each legislative house of the Region. (4) No law enacted by the legislature of a Region, to the extent that it alters any provision of the constitution of that Region to which this subsection applies, shall have effect unless a resolution supported by the votes of at least two-thirds of all the members of that House is passed by each House of Parliament signifying consent to its having effect. (5) Where a new Region is established out of other territories or parts of other territories, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of that Region with respect to matters not included in the Legislative Lists (including provision for the con. stitution of that Region) for a period of six months after the establish ment of that Region but thereafter Parliament shall have only such powers to make laws for that Region as it has in relation to the other Regions : Provided that nothing in this section shall preclude the legislature of that Region from making laws in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and the constitution of the Region. (6) Subsection (4) of this section applies to any provision or the constitution of a Region relating to (a) the establishment of any of the following, that is to say, Ow office of Governor, a legislative house, a legislature, an executive council, the office of any Minister of the Government, a High Court, an electoral commission, a public service commission a judicial service commission, the office of a Director of Audit and the office of a Director of Public Prosecutions ; (b) the manner in which the Governor's functions are to be exercised. (c) the appointment, 'tenure of office and the terms of ser vice of of the following, that is to say, the Governor. the judges of the High Court, the members of the commissions reffered to in

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2399

paragraph (a) of this subsection, the Director of Audit and the Director of Public Prosecutions ; (d) the functions of any of the following, that is to say, the executive council, the commissions referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection, the Director of Audit and the Director of Public Prosecutions ; (e) the appointment and tenure of office of Ministers of the Government and the allocation of portfolios ; (f) the summoning, sessions, prorogation and dissolution of the legislative houses ; (g) the establishment of a Consolidated Revenue Fund and other public funds, the authorization of expenditure therefrom and the imposition of charges upon any public fund or upon the revenues and assets of the Region ; (h) appeals to the High Court from subordinate courts ; and (i) the procedure of the commissions referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection. Interpretation 6. In this Chapter (a) references to any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Nigeria Independence Act, 1960, or the constitution of a Region include references to any law, or instrument made under a law, that amends, modifies, re-enacts with or without amendment or modification or makes different provision in lieu of, that provision ; and (b) references to the alteration of any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Nigeria Independence Act, 1960, or the constitution of a Region include references to the amendment, modification or re-enactment, with or without amendment or modification, of that provision, the suspension or repeal of that provision and the making of different provision in lieu of that provision.
CHAPTER

II

CITIZENSHIP

who become citizens on 1st October, 1960 ( I) Every person who, having been born in the former Colony or Protexto of Nigeria, was on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person s halbecomitznfNgrahestdyofOcbr,
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Nigeria by virtue of this subsection if neither of his parents nor any of his grandparents

Persons

was born

in the former Colony or Protectorate of Nigeria. (2) Every person who, having been born outside the former Colony and PrProtectorate of Nigeria, was on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person shall, if his father was born in the former Colony or Protectorate and was a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, (or, if he that deathdate, was such a citizen or person at the date of his or would have become such a citizen or person but for his death) become a citizen of Nigeria on the first day of October, 1960.

2400	

NIGERIA

Persons entitled to be registered as citizens 8.---(1) Any person who, but for the proviso to subsection (1) of section 7 of this Constitution, would be a citizen of Nigeria by virtue of that subsection shall be entitled, upon making application before the first day of October, 1962, in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria : Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not make an ' application under this subsection himself but an application may be made on his behalf by his parent or guardian. (2) Any woman, who on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, was a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person and who is or has been married to a person(a) who becomes a citizen of Nigeria by virtue of section 7 of this Constitution ; or (b) who, having died before the first day of October, 1960, would, but for his death, have become a citizen of Nigeria by virtue of that section, shall be entitled, upon making application in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria. (3) Any woman who is or has been married to a person who becomes a citizen of Nigeria by registration under subsection (1) of this section and is at the date of such registration a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person shall be entitled, upon making application within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria. (4) Any woman who on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, was a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or a British protected person and who has been married to a person who, having died before the first day of October, 1960, would, but for his death, be entitled to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria under subsection (1) of this section, shall be entitled; upon making application before the first day of October, 1962, in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria. (5) The provisions of subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section shall be without prejudice to the provisions of section 7 of this Constitution. Persons naturalized or registered before 1st October, 1960 9. Any person who on the thirtieth day of September, 1960, was. a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies (a) having become such a citizen under the British Nationality Ad. 1948(a), 'by virtue of his having been naturalized in the former Colony or Protectorate of Nigeria as a British subject before that Act came into force ; or (b) having become such a citizen by virtue of his having been naturalized or registered in the former Colony or Protectorate of Nigeria under that Act, shall be entitled, upon making application before the first day of October, 1962, in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Nigeria : Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not make

2402	

NIGERIA

Criminal liability of Commonwealth citizens 14.—(1) A Commonwealth citizen who is not a citizen of Nigeria or a
citizen of the Republic of Ireland who is not a citizen of Nigeria shall not be guilty of an offence against any law in force in Nigeria by reason of anything done or omitted in any part of the Commonwealth other than Nigeria or in the Republic of Ireland or in any foreign country unless (a) the act or omission would be an offence if he were an alien ; and (b) in the case of an act or omission in any part of the Commonwealth or in the Republic of Ireland, it would be an offence if the country in which the act was done or the omission made were a foreign country. (2) In this section " foreign country " means a country (other than the Republic of Ireland) that is not part of the Commonwealth.

Powers of Parliament
15. Parliament may make provision (a) for the acquisition of citizenship of Nigeria by persons who do not become citizens of Nigeria by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter (b) for depriving of his citizenship of Nigeria any person who is a citizen of Nigeria otherwise than by virtue of subsection (1) of section 7 or section 10 of this Constitution ; or (c) for the renunciation by any person of his citizenship of Nigeria.

interpretation 16.—(1) In this Chapter" alien " means a person who is not a citizen of Nigeria, a Commonwealth citizen other than a citizen of Nigeria, a British protected person or a citizen of the Republic of Ireland ; " British protected person " means a person who is a British protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act, 1948. (2) For the purposes of this Chapter a person born in a ship or aircraft registered in Nigeria or belonging to the Government of the Federation shall be deemed to have been born in Nigeria. (3) Any reference in this Chapter to the national status of the father of a person at the time of that person's birth shall, in relation to person born after the death of his father, be construed as a reference to the national status of the father at the time of his father's death and where that death occurred before the first day of October, 1960. and the birth occurred after the thirtieth day of September, 1960, the national status that the father would have had if he had died on the first day of October, 1960, shall be deemed to be his national status at the time of his death.
CHAPTER III FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

Deprivation of life
17.—(1) No person shall be deprived intentionally of his life, save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been found guilty. (2) A person shall not be regarded as having been deprived 	 ofhis life in contravention 'of this section if he dies as the result of the use,

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2403

to such extent and in such circumstances as are permitted by law, of such force as is reasonably justifiable (a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the defence of property ; (b) in order to effect an arrest or to prevent the escape of a person detained ; (c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or mutiny ; or (d) in order to prevent the commission by that person of a criminal offence. (3) The use of force in any part of Nigeria in circumstances in which and to the extent to which it would have been authorized in that part on the first day of November, 1959, by the Code of Criminal Law established by the Criminal Code Ordinance(a), as amended, shall be regarded as reasonably justifiable for the purposes of this section.
Inhuman treatment 18.—(1) No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman

or degrading punishment or other treatment. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law by reason only that it authorizes the infliction in any part of Nigeria of any punishment that was lawful and customary in that part on the first day of November, 1959.
Slavery and forced labour 19.—(1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.

(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. (3) For the purposes of this section "forced labour" does not act include- e (a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court ; (b) any labour required of members of the armed forces of the Crown in pursuance of their duties as such or, in the case of persons who have conscientious objections to service in the armed forces, any labour required instead of such service ; (c) any labour required in the event of an emergency or calamity threatening the life or well-being of the community ; or (d) any labour that forms part of normal communal or other civil
obligations. Deprivation of personal liberty

I No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty save in btyhlaew-fol wingcase andinac ordancewithaprocedurep rmited (a) in c onsequence of his unfitness to plead to a criminal charge, inexcutofhs rdeoacutinspf criminal offence of which he has been found guilty or in the execution of the order of a court of record punishing him for
contempt of itself ; (b)
(b) by reason of his failure to comply with the order of a court or in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation imposed upon him by law (c) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of or a court or upon reasonable suspicion of his having

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2405

of the private lives of the parties or to such extent as it may consider necessary by reason of special circumstances in which publicity would be contrary to the interests of justice ; and (b) if in any proceedings before a court or such a tribunal a Minister of the Government of the Federation or a Minister of the Government of a Region certifies that it would not be in the public interest for any matter to be publicly disclosed, the court or tribunal shall make arrangements for evidence relating to that matter to be heard in camera and shall take such other action as may be necessary or expedient to prevent the disclosure of the matter. (4) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed to be innocent until he is proved guilty : Provided that nothing in this section shall invalidate any law by reason only that the law imposes upon any such person the burden of proving particular facts. (5) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall be entitled (a) to be informed promptly, in language that he understands and in detail, of the nature of the offence ; (b) to be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence ; (c) to defend himself in person of by legal representatives of his own choice ; (d) to examine in person or by his legal representatives the witnesses called by the prosecution before any court and to obtain the attendance and carry out the examination of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the court on the same conditions as those applying to the witnesses called by the prosecution ; and (e) to have without payment the assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand the language used at the trial of the 'offence': Provided that nothing in this subsection shall invalidate any law by reason only that the law prohibits legal representation in a court established by or under the Native Courts Law, 1956, the Sharia of Appeal Law, 1960, or the Court of Resolution Law, 1960, of Northern Nigeria(a), the Customary Courts Law, 1957, of Western ,NiorgtheeCursmaay(b)Lw,1956ofEasternNig(c), asmend,orylwpacignofthselw. Wi(sthrendaf6oypcm)l,theoursa keparcodfth ingsaecudpronayes auyth'oirmzedn hat behalf shall 'be entitled to obtain copies bt of the record within a reasonable time upon payment of such fee parsecmibdylw. (7) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission that did not, at the time it took place, constitute such an offence and no penalty shall be imposed for any methofncwasied. criminal offence heavier than the penalty in force at the ti (8) No person who shows that he has been tried by any competent court for a criminal offence and either convicted or acquitted shall again for that offence or for a criminal offence having the same ingredients that offence save upon the order of a superior

2406	

NIGERIA

court ; and no person who shows that he has been pardoned for a criminal offence shall again be tried for that offence. (9) No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial. (10) No person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless that offence is defined and the penalty therefor is prescribed in a written law Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a court of record from punishing any person for contempt of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and the penalty therefor is not so prescribed.

Private and family life 22.—(1) Every person shall be entitled to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, public health or the economic well-being of the community ; or (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedom of other persons.

Freedom of conscience 23.—(1) Every person shall be entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others, and in public or in private to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance. (2) No person attending any place of education shall be required to receive religious instruction or to take part in or attend any religious ceremony or observances if such instruction, ceremony or observances relate to a religion other than his own. (3) No religious community or denomination shall be prevented from providing religious instruction for pupils of that community or denomination in any place of education maintained wholly by that community or denomination. (4) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health ; or (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedom of other persons, including their rights and freedom to observe and practise their religions without the unsolicited intervention of members of other religions.

Freedom of expression 24.—(1) Every person shall be entitled to freedom 'of expression.
including freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate , any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health ;

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2407

(b) for the purpose of protecting the rights, reputations and freedom of other persons, preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of the courts or regulating telephony, wireless broadcasting, television, or the exhibition of cinematograph films ; or (c) imposing restrictions upon persons 'holding office under the Crown, members of the armed forces of the Crown or members of a police force. Peaceful assembly and association 25.—(1) Every person shall be entitled to assemble freely and associate with other persons and in particular he may form or belong to trade unions and other associations for the protection of his interests. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health ; (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons ; or (c) imposing restrictions upon persons holding office under the Crown, members of the armed forces of the Crown or members of a police force. Freedom of movement 26.—(1) Every citizen of Nigeria is entitled to move freely throughout Nigeria and to reside in any part thereof ; and no citizen of Nigeria shall be expelled from Nigeria or refused entry thereto. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society (a) restricting the movement or residence of any person within Nigeria in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health ; (b) for the removal of persons from Nigeria to be tried outside Nigeria for criminal offences or to undergo imprisonment outside Nigeria in execution of the sentences of courts in respect of criminal offences of which they have been found guilty ; ) imposing restrictions upon the movement or residence within Nigeria of members of the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region, members of the armed forces of the ('town or members of a police force. (3) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law by reason only that the law imposes restrictions with respect to the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property in Nigeria or any part thereof. Fredom 27.Freedom from discrimination (I) A citizen of Nigeria of a particular community, tribe, place of religion or political opinion shall not, by reason only that he is origin such a 'lion, person(a) be subjected either expressly by, or in the practical application of, any law in force in Nigeria or any executive or administrative action of the Government of the Federation or the Government of a Region to disabilities or restrictions to which citizens of Nigeria of other communities, tribes, places of origin, religions or political opinions are not made subject ; or

2408	

NIGERIA

(b) be accorded either expressly by, or in the practical application of, any law in force in Nigeria or any such executive or administrative action any privilege or advantage that is not conferred on citizens of Nigeria of other communities, tribes, places of origin, religions or political opinions. (2) Nothing in this section shall invalidate any law by reason only that the law (a) prescribes qualifications for service in an office under the Crown or as a member of the armed forces of the Crown or a member of a police force or for the service of a body corporate established directly by any law in force in Nigeria; (b) imposes restrictions with respect to the appointment of any person to an office under the Crown or as a member of the armed forces of the Crown or a member of a police force or to an office in the service of a body corporate established directly by any law in force in Nigeria ; (c) imposes restrictions with respect to the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property ; or (d) imposes any disability or restriction or accords any privilege or advantage that, having regard to its nature and to special circumstances pertaining to the persons to whom it applies, is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. Derogations from fundamental rights 28.—(1) An Act 'of Parliament shall not be invalid by reason only that it provides for the taking, during periods of emergency, of measures that derogate from the provisions of section 17, 20, 21 or 27 of this Constitution but no such measures shall be taken in pursuance of any such Act during any period of emergency save to the extent that those measures are reasonably justifiable for the purpose of dealing with the situation that exists during that period of emergency: Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize any derogation from the provisions of section 17 of this Constitution except in respect of deaths resulting from acts of war or any derogation from the provisions of subsection (7) of section 21 of this Constitution. (2) In this section " period of emergency " means a period of emergency for the purposes of section 65 of this Constitution. Reference to tribunal in certain cases 29.—(1) Where (a) any person is detained in pursuance of an Act of Parliament derogating from the provisions of section 20 of this Constitution
Or

(b) the movement or residence of any person within Nigeria who is a citizen of Nigeria is lawfully restricted (otherwise than order of a court) in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health, that person shall be entitled to require that his case should be referred within one month of the beginning of the period of detention or restriction and thereafter during that period at intervals of not more than six months to a tribunal established by law and that trtribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing the detention or restriction to the authority	 that has ordered it:

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2409

Provided that such authority, unless it is otherwise provided by law, shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendation. (2) A tribunal established for the purposes of this section shall be constituted in such manner as to ensure its independence and impartiality and its chairman shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the Federation from among the persons qualified to practise in Nigeria as advocates or solicitors. Compulsory acquisition of property 30.—(1) No 'property, movable or immovable, shall be taken possession of compulsorily and no right over or interest in any such property shall be acquired compulsorily in any part of Nigeria except by or under the provisions of a law that (a) requires the payment of adequate compensation therefor ; and (b) gives to any person claiming such compensation a right of access, for the determination of his interest in the property and the amount of compensation, to the High Court having jurisdiction in that part of Nigeria. (2) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law in force on the thirty-first day of March, 1958, or any law made after that date that amends or replaces any such law and does not (a) add to the kinds of property that may be taken possession of or the rights over and interests in property that may be acquired ; (b) add to the purposes for which or circumstances in which such property may be taken possession of or acquired ; (c) make the conditions governing entitlement to any compensation or the amount thereof less favourable to any person owning or interested in the property ; or (d) deprive any person of any such right as is mentioned in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of this section. (3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting any general law(a) for the imposition or enforcement of any tax, rate or due ; (b (b) for the imposition of penalties or forfeitures for breach of the law, whether under civil process or after conviction of an offence ; (c) relating to leases, tenancies, mortgages, charges, bills of sale or any other rights or 'obligations arising out of contracts ; (d) relating to the vesting and administration of the property of persons adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt or insolvent, of persons of unsound mind, of deceased persons and of companies, other bodies corporate and unincorporate societies in the course it being (e) wound up ; (e) relating to the execution of judgments or orders of courts ; (f) providing for the taking of possession of property that is in a dangerous state or is injurious to the health of human beings, plants or animals ;
(g) relating to enemy property ;

trusts and trustees ; (i) relating to the limitation of actions ; (j) relating to property vested in bodies corporate directly established by any law in force in Nigeria ;
(h) relating to

2410	

NIGERIA

(k) relating to the temporary taking of possession of property for the purposes of any examination, investigation or enquiry ; or (1) providing for the carrying out of work on land for the purpose of soil-conservation. (4) The provisions of this section shall apply in relation to the compulsory taking of possession of property, movable or immovable, and the compulsory acquisition of rights over and interests in such property by or on behalf of the Crown. Special jurisdiction of High Courts in relation to this Chapter 31.—(1) Any person who alleges that any of the provisions of this Chapter has been contravened in any territory in relation to him may apply to the High Court of that territory for redress. (2) Subject to the provisions of section 108 of this Constitution, the High Court of a territory shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine any application made to it in pursuance of this section and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing, or securing the enforcement, within that territory of any rights to which the person who makes the application may be entitled under this Chapter. (3) Parliament may make provision with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Courts of the territories for the purposes of this section and may confer upon those courts such powers in addition to those conferred by this section as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling those courts more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon them by this section. Interpretation 32. In this Chapter, unless it is otherwise expressly provided or required by the context" court " means any court of law in Nigeria (other than a courtmartial) and includes Her Majesty in Council : Provided that, in relation to a member of the armed forces of the Crown, it also includes a court-martial ; " law " includes an unwritten rule of law ; " member of the armed forces of the Crown " includes any person who is subject to naval, military or air-force law ; " member of a police force " includes a person who is subject to any law relating to the discipline of a police force ;
CHAPTER IV THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL

Establishment of office of Governor-General 33.—(1) There shall be a Governor-General and Commander in Chief of the Federation, who shall be appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall N. Majesty's representative in the Federation. (2) The Prime Minister shall consult the Premier of each Region before tendering any advice to Her Majesty for the purposes of this section. Oaths to be taken by Governor-General 34. A person appointed to the office of Governor-General shall before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the

Term ons i u ion oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament. Discharge of Governor-General's functions during vacancy, etc. 35. Whenever the office of Governor-General is vacant or the holder of the office is absent from Nigeria or is for any reason unable to perform the functions conferred upon him by this Constitution, those functions shall be performed by such person as Her Majesty may appoint or, if there is no person in Nigeria so appointed and able to perform those functions, by the Chief Justice of the Federation: Provided that nothing in this section shall preclude the GovernorGeneral from performing any of those functions at any time when he is absent from Nigeria.
CHAPTER V PARLIAMENT

Part I Composition of Parliament Establishment of Parliament 36. There shall be a Parliament of the Federation, which shall consist of Her Majesty, a Senate and a House of Representatives. Composition of Senate 37.—(1) The Senate shall consist of (a) twelve Senators representing each Region, who shall be selected at a joint sitting of the legislative houses of that Region from among persons nominated by the Governor ; (b) four Senators representing the Federal territory ; and (c) four Senators selected by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (2) The Senators representing the Federal territory shall be (a) the Oba of Lagos, who shall be an ex-officio member of the Senate ; (b) a Chief selected in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament by the White-Cap Chiefs and War Chiefs of Lagos from among their own number ; and (c) two other persons selected for that purpose in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament. (3) A joint sitting of the legislative houses of a Region may regulate its own procedure for the purposes of this section. Composition of House of Representatives 38. The House of Representatives shall consist of three hundred and five members. Qualifications for membership of Parliament 39. Subject 'to the provisions of section 40 of this Constitution (a) a person shall be qualified for selection as a Senator representing a territory if he is a citizen of Nigeria and has attained the age of forty years ; (b) a person shall be qualified for selection as a Senator by the Governor-General (whether or not he is a citizen of Nigeria) if (heasctind)gofwey-ars';nd a person shall be qualified for election as a member of the I louse of Representatives if he is a citizen of Nigeria and has attained the age' of twenty-one years and, in the case of a person who stands for election in Northern Nigeria, is a ma le 'person.

2412	

NIGERIA

Disqualifications for membership of Parliament, etc. 40.—(1) No person shall be qualified for selection as a Senator or

election to the House of Representatives (a) save for the purposes of selection as a Senator by the GovernorGeneral, if he has voluntarily acquired citizenship of a country other than Nigeria or has made a declaration of allegiance to such a country ; (b) if under any law in force in any part of Nigeria he is adjudged to be a lunatic or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind ; (c) if he is under a sentence of death imposed on him by any court of law in Nigeria or a sentence of imprisonment (by whatever name called) exceeding six months imposed on him by such a court or substituted by competent authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court ; (d) if he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in any part of Nigeria ; (e) save as otherwise provided by Parliament, if he is a member of the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region, a member of the armed forces of the Crown or the holder of any other office of emolument under the Crown ; or (f) if he is an ex-officio member of the Senate or a legislative house of a Region. (2) Parliament may provide that a person shall not be qualified for selection as a Senator or 'election to the House of Representatives for such period (not exceeding five years) as may be prescribed if he is convicted by any court of law in Nigeria of such offences connected with the selection or election of members of a House of Parliament or a legislative house of a Region as may be prescribed. (3) Parliament may provide that a person disqualified under paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section by reason of his being under a sentence of imprisonment exceeding six months for any such offence (being an offence that appears to Parliament to involve dishonesty) as may be prescribed or by reason of his being under sentences of imprisonment that include such a sentence for any such offence shall not be qualified for selection as a Senator or election to the House of Representatives for such period from the date on which he ceases to be disqualified under that paragraph (not exceeding five years) as may be prescribed. (4) Parliament may provide that a person who is the holder of any office the functions of which involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election to,the House of Representatives or the compilation of any register of voters for the purposes of such an election shall not be qualified for election to that House. (5) Parliament may, in order to permit any person who has been adjudged to be a lunatic, declared to be of unsound mind, senten ced to death or imprisonment or adjudged or declared bankrupt to against the decision in, accordance with any law in force in Nigeria provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of subsection (I) of th is section until such time as may be prescribed. (6) For the purposes of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served
appeaI

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2413

consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds six months but if any one of those sentences exceeds that term they shall be regarded as one sentence. (7) For the purposes of paragraph (e) of subsection (1) of this section (a) a person shall not be regarded as holding an office of emolument under the Crown by reason only that he is in receipt of a pension or other like benefit in respect of service in an office under the Crown ; and (b) the office of the President or the Deputy President of the Senate, a Senator, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, a member of the House of Representatives, a Minister of the Government of the Federation, a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister, a member of the Council of Ministers, the President, the Speaker, the Deputy President or the Deputy Speaker of a legislative house of a Region, a member of such a legislative house, a Minister of the Government of a Region, a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister, a member of the Executive Council of a Region, a member of the Council of Chiefs of Northern Nigeria, a member of the Minority Council of a Minority Area in Western Nigeria or Eastern Nigeria or a member of any such body corporate as is referred to in the proviso to subsection (10) of this section shall not be regarded as an office of emolument under the Crown. (8) Save as otherwise provided by Parliament, a person shall not be regarded as disqualified for selection as a Senator or election as a member of the House of Representatives under 'paragraph (e) of subsection (1) oaf this section by reason only that he holds office as a member of a statutory corporation. (9) If any person who holds the office of a member of any statutory corporation is selected as a Senator or elected as a member of the House of Representatives he shall, unless it is otherwise provided by Parliament, thereupon cease to hold office as a member of that corporation. (10) In this section "statutory corporation " means any body corporate established directly by any law in force in Nigeria: Provided that it does not include any body corporate established by or under the Native Authority Law, 1954, of Northern Nigeria(a), the Western Region Local Government Law, 1952, or the Local Government Law, 1957, of Western Nigeria(b) or the Eastern Region Local Government Law, 1960, of Eastern Nigeria (c), as amended, or any law replacing any of those laws.
President of Senate 41.—(1) There shall

be a President of the Senate, who shall be elected by the members of the Senate. (2) No person shall be elected as President of the Senate unless he k a Senator or a person who is qualified for selection as a Senator. (3) The President of the Senate shall vacate his office(if,havngbe)lctdromngheSats,cobe a Senator otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament ;

2414	

NIGERIA

(b) if, having been elected from outside the Senate, any circumstances arise (other than a dissolution of Parliament) that if he were a Senator would cause him to vacate his seat as such ; (c) when the Senate first sits after any dissolution of Parliament ; (d) if he becomes a Minister of the Government of the Federation or a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister ; or (e) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the Senate supported by the votes of two-thirds of all the members of that House. (4) No business shall be transacted in the Senate (other than an election to the office of President) at any time when the office of President is vacant. Speaker of House of Representatives 42.—(1) There shall be a Speaker of the House of Representatives. Who shall be elected by the members of that House. (2) No person shall be elected as Speaker of the House of Representatives unless he is a member of the House or a person who is qualified for election in some part of Nigeria as a member of the House. (3) The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall vacate his office (a) if, having been elected from among the members of the House, he ceases to be a member otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament (b) if, having been elected from outside the House, any circumstances arise (other than a dissolution of Parliament) that if he were a member of the House would cause him to vacate his seat as such ; (c) when. the House first sits after any dissolution of Parliament ; (d) if he becomes a Minister of the Government of the Federation or a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister ; or (e) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the House supported by the votes of two-thirds of all the members of the House. (4) No business shall be transacted in the House of Representatives (other than an election to the office of Speaker) at any time when the office of Speaker is vacant. Right of attendance of Ministers 43.—(1) A Minister of the Government of the Federation may attend and take part in the proceedings of either House of Parliament notwithstanding that he is not a member of that House. (2) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person who is not a member of a House of Parliament to vote in that House or any of its committees. Tenure of seats of members of Parliament 44.—(1) A Senator (other than the Oba of Lagos) or a member of the House of Representatives shall vacate his seat in the House of which he is a member (a) if he becomes a member of the other House of Parliament or a legislative house of a Region ; (b) if any other circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of that House, would cause him to be disqualified for select km

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2415

election as such under subsection (1) or (2) of section 40 of this Constitution ; (c) if he ceases to be a citizen of Nigeria ; (d) if he becomes a Minister of the Government of a Region ; (e) save as otherwise provided by Parliament, if he becomes a member of any statutory corporation ; or (f) if he is absent from two consecutive meetings of the House and the President or Speaker of the House does not, by writing under his hand, excuse his absence within one month after the end of the second meeting. (2) Parliament may, in order to permit any Senator or member of the House of Representatives who has been adjudged to be a lunatic, declared to be of unsound mind, sentenced to death or imprisonment or adjudged or declared bankrupt to appeal against the decision in accordance with any law in force in Nigeria, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of this section until such time as may be prescribed. (3) In this section the expression " statutory corporation " has the meaning assigned to it for the purposes of section 40 of this Constitution.
Establishment of Electoral Commission 45.—(1) There shall be an Electoral Commission for the Federation.

(2) The members of the Electoral Commission of the Federation shall be (a) a Chief Electoral Commissioner, who shall be chairman ; and (b) a member representing each territory. (3) The members of the Electoral Commission of the Federation shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (4) Before tendering any advice for the purposes of this section in relation to the appointment of the member of the Electoral Commission of the Federation representing a Region, the Prime Minister consult the Premier of that Region. (5) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a member of theElectoralCom is on ftheFed rationifheisame berofeither House of Parliament, a member of a legislative house of a Region, a Minister. of the Government of the Federation, a Minister of the Government of a Region or a member of the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region. (6) ElecSubject toral to the provisions of this section, a member of the C'ommission of the Federation shall vacate his officeor (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment ; (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such. (7) A member of the the Electoral Commission of the Federation may be removed from office by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, for inability to discharge the

2416	

NIGERIA

functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. (8) A member of the Electoral Commission of the Federation shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (9) 'In the exercise of its functions under this Constitution the Electoral Commission of the Federation shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. Constituencies 46.--(1) Nigeria shall be divided into as many constituencies as there are members of the House of Representatives in such manner as the competent authority, acting with the approval of each House of Parliament signified by resolution, may prescribe. (2) No constituency shall form part of more than one territory and the boundaries of each constituency shall be such that the number of inhabitants thereof is as nearly equal to the population quota as is reasonably practicable: Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means of communication, geographical features, the distribution of different communities and the boundaries of the territories. (3) The competent authority shall review the division of Nigeria into constituencies at intervals of not less than eight and not more than ten years and may alter the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this section to such extent as it may consider desirable in the light of the review: 'Provided that that authority may at any time carry out such a review and alter the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this section to such extent as it considers necessary in consequence of any amendment to section 3 or 38 of this Constitution or any provision replacing either of those sections or by reason 'of the holding of a census of the population of Nigeria in pursuance of an Act of Parliament. (4) Where the boundaries of any constituency established under this section are altered in accordance with the provisions, of this section, that alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament after the alteration has been approved by both Houses of Parliament. (5) In this section "population quota " means the number obtained by dividing the number of the inhabitants of Nigeria by the number of constituencies into which Nigeria is divided under this section. (6) For the purposes of this section the number of inhabitants of Nigeria or any part thereof shall be ascertained by reference to the latest census of the population of Nigeria held in pursuance of an Act of Parliament. (7) In this section " the competent authority " means the Electoral Commission of the Federation or such other authority consisting a chairman appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, and of members appointed in like manner to represent the territories (each territory being equally represented) as may be established in that behalf by Parliament.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2417

Elections 47.—(1) Every constituency established under section 46 of this Constitution shall return to the House of Representatives one member who shall be directly elected in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) The registration of voters and the conduct of elections shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Electoral Commission of the Federation. Determination of questions respecting membership of Parliament 48.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 108 of this Constitution, the competent High Court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether (a) any person has been validly selected as a Senator or elected as a member of the House of Representatives ; or (b) the seat in the Senate of a Senator or the seat in the House of Representatives of a member of that House has become vacant. (2) Parliament may make provision with respect to (a) the persons who may apply to the competent High Court for the determination of any question under this section ; (b) the circumstances and manner in which, and the conditions upon which, any such application may be made ; and (c) the powers, practice and procedure of the competent High Court in relation to any such application. (3) In this section " the competent High Court " means, in relation to a person who has been selected as a Senator to represent a Region or elected a member of the House of Representatives in a Region, the High Court of that Region and, in relation to any other person, Clerks Ow High Court of the Federal territory. to Houses of Parliament and their staffs 49.—(1) There shall be a Clerk to the Senate and a Clerk to the House of Representatives Provided that the offices of Clerk to the Senate and Clerk to the House of Representatives may be held by the same person. S(ubjec2tohpr)visnfayActoPrlmen,hfio theClrkofacHusPlimentad:hbrsofital beoficsnthpulrveofFdatin. Part 2 Procedure in Parliament Oaths to be taken by members of Parliament 50. -(1) Every member of either House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat in that House, take and subscribe before the House the oath of allegiance but a member may before taking that' oath that part in the election of a President of the Senate or a Speaker of the House of Representatives, as the case may be: Provided that if a House of Parliament is not sitting a member may take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before a judge . of the High Court of a territory (2) Any person elected to the office •of President of the Senate who it	 mid any person elected to the office of Speaker of

2418	

NIGERIA

the House of Representatives who is not a member of that House shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be. Presiding in Senate 51.—(1) There shall preside at any sitting of the Senate (a) the President ; or (b) in the absence of the President, the Deputy President ; or (c) in the absence of the President and the Deputy President, such Senator as the Senate may elect for that purpose. (2) The Senate may from time to time elect a Senator to be Deputy President and any person so elected shall hold office as such until he ceases to be a Senator or is removed from office by the Senate. Presiding in House of Representatives 52.—(1) There shall preside at any sitting of the House of Representatives (a) the Speaker ; or (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker ; or (c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, such member of the House as the House may elect for that purpose. (2) The House of Representatives may from time to time elect a member of the House to be Deputy Speaker and any person so elected shall hold office as such until he ceases to be a member of the House or is removed from office by the House. Quorum in Houses of Parliament 53. If objection is taken by any member of a House of Parliament present that there are present in that House (besides the person presiding) fewer than one-sixth of all the members of that House and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the House, the person presiding ascertains that the number of members present is still less than one-sixth of all the members of the House, he shall thereupon adjourn the House. Use of English, in Parliament 54. The business of Parliament shall be, conducted in English. Voting in Parliament 55.---(1) Any question proposed for decision in a House of Parlia ment shall be determined by the required majority of the member, present and voting ; and the person presiding shall cast a vote whenever necessary to avoid an equality of votes but shall not vote in any other case. (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the required majority for the purposes of determining any question shall be a simple majority. (3) The rules of procedure of a House of Parliament may provided that the vote of a member upon a question in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be disallowed. Unqualified persons sitting or voting 56. Any person who sits or votes in either House of Parliament knowing or having reasonable ground for knowing that he is notenti led to do so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds or

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2419

such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament for each day on which he sits or votes in that House, which shall be recoverable by action in the High Court of Lagos at the suit of the AttorneyGeneral of the Federation. Mode of exercising legislative power 57.—(1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised by bills passed by both Houses (or in the cases mentioned in section 59 of this Constitution the House of Representatives) and assented to by the Governor-General on behalf of Her Majesty. (2) A bill other than a money bill may originate in either House of Parliament but a money bill may originate only in the House of Representatives. (3) When a bill has been passed by the House of Parliament in which it originated, it shall be sent to the other House ; and it shall be presented to the Governor-General for assent (a) when it has been passed by the other House and agreement has been reached between the two Houses on any amendments made in it ; or (b) when it is required to be so presented under section 59 of this Constitution. (4) When a bill is presented to the Governor-General for assent, he shall signify that he assents or that he withholds assent. (5) A bill shall not become law unless it has been duly passed and assented to in accordance with this Constitution. Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures S8.—(1) The Senate shall not (a) proceed upon any bill, other than a bill sent from the House of Representatives, that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes(i) for the imposition, repeal or alteration of taxation ; (ii) for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation ; (iii) for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation of any moneys not charged thereon or any alteration in the amount of such a payment, issue or withdrawal ; or (iv) for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Federation ; (b)procedunaym tobilhanepo of the person presiding makes provision for any of those : (purposes c) (c)proedunaymti(cldgnaemtoin), the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes ; or (d) receive any petition that, in the opinion of the person presiding, requests that provision be made for any of those purposes. (2) Except upon the recommendation of the Governor-General signiofi fReprsntaivhlo- ed by a Minister of the Government of the . Federation, the House (a) proceed upon any bill (including any amendment to a bill) that , in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes-

2420	

NIGERIA

(i) for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction : (ii) for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction ; (iii) for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation of any moneys not charged thereon or any increase in the amount of such a payment, issue or withdrawal ; or (iv) for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Federation ; (b) proceed upon any motion (including any amendment to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes ; or (c) receive any petition that, in the opinion of the person presiding, requests that provision be made for any of those purposes.
Limitation of powers of Senate 59.—(l) Where a money bill is passed by the House of Representa-

tives and, having been sent to the Senate at least one month before the end of the session, is not passed by the Senate without amendment within one month after it is so sent, the bill shall, unless the House of Representatives otherwise resolves, be presented to the GovernorGeneral for his assent. (2) Where (a) a bill that is not a money bill is, passed by the House of Representatives and, having been sent to the Senate at least one month before the end of the session, is not passed by the Senate before the end of the session or is passed by the Senate with amendments to which the House of Representatives does not before the end of the session agree ; and (b) in the following session (whether of the same Parliament or not) but not earlier than six months after it was first passed by the House of Representatives the same bill, with no other alterations than those mentioned in subsection (4) of this section, is passed again by the House of Representatives and sent to the Senate at least one month before the end 'of the session and is not passed by the Senate before the end of the session or is passed by the Senate with amendments to which the House of Representatives does not before the end of the session agree, the bill shall, unless the House of Representatives otherwise resolves. be presented to the Governor-General for his assent with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both Houses. (3) The House •of Representatives may, on the passage of a bil for the 'purposes of paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of this section suggest any amendments without inserting the amendments in the bill and any such suggested amendments shall be considered by the Senate and, if agreed to by the Senate, shall 'be treated as amendments agreed to by both Houses ; but the exercise of this power by the House Hof Representatives shall not affect the operation of this 	 section if the bill is not passed by the Senate or is passed by the Senate with amendments to which the House of Representatives does not (4) The alterations referred to in subsection (2) of this section are alterations certified by the Speaker of the House of Representatices

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2421

to be necessary owing to the time that has elapsed since the bill was passed in the earlier session or to represent amendments made in that session by the Senate. (5) When a money bill is sent to the Senate from the House of Representatives it shall bear a certificate of the Speaker of the House of Representatives that it is a money bill. (6) When a bill is presented to the Governor-General in pursuance of this section it shall bear a certificate of the Speaker of the House of Representatives that this section has been complied with and that certificate shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be questioned in any court of law. (7) This section does not apply to any bill for the purposes of section 4 of this Constitution.
Regulation of procedure in Houses of Parliament 60.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, each House

of Parliament may regulate its own procedure. (2) Each House of Parliament may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the House first meets after any dissolution of Parliament) and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present at or to participate in the proceedings of the House shall not invalidate those proceedings.
Interpretation

61. In this Part of this Chapter " money bill " means a. bill that in the opinion of the Speaker of the House of Representatives contains only provisions dealing with (a) the imposition, repeal, remission, alteration or regulation of taxation ; (b) the imposition for the payment of debt or other financial purposes (c) of charges on the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation or the variation or repeal of any such charges ; the grant of money to the Crown or to any other person or authority or the variation or revocation of any such grant (d) the appropriation, receipt, custody, investment, issue or audit of ,accounts of public money ; (e) the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof ; or Provided (f) subordinate matters incidental to any of those matters : 	 that the expressions " taxation ", "public money " and do not include any taxation, money or loan raised by local or bodies for public purposes. authorities
Part 3 Summoning, prorogation and dissolution Sessions of Parliament

62. EachsesionfParlmthbedsucplawithn Nigera ndshal beginatsuchtime(notbeinglater hantwelv monthsfredpcingsofParlmethbn prorogues or three months from the end of that session if Parliament has been dissolved) as the Governor-General shall appoint.
anal dissolution of Parliament

63.-(1) The General may at any time prorogue or

2422	

NIGERIA

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved. (3) At any time when the Federation is at war, Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection (2) of this section for not more than twelve months at a time: Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years. (4) In the exercise of his powers to dissolve Parliament, the GovernorGeneral shall act in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister: Provided that (a) if the Prime Minister recommends 'a dissolution and the GovernorGeneral considers that the government of the Federation can be carried on without `a dissolution and that a dissolution would not be in the interests of the Federation he may refuse to dissolve Parliament (b) if the House of Representatives passes a resolution that it has no confidence in the Government of the Federation and the Prime Minister does not within three days either resign or advise a dissolution, the Governor-General may dissolve Parliament ; and (c) if the office of Prime Minister is vacant and the GovernorGeneral considers that there is no prospect of his being able to appoint a person 'who can command the 'support of the majority of the members of the House of Representatives to that office within a reasonable time, the Governor-General may dissolve Parliament. Part 4 Legislative powers Powers of Parliament to make laws 64.—(1) Parliament shall have power to make laws (a) for the peace, order and good government of Nigeria (other than the Federal territory) or any part thereof with respect to any matter included in the Legislative Lists ; and (b) for the peace, order and good government of the Federal territory with respect to any matter, whether or not it is included in the Legislative Lists. (2) The power of Parliament to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Regions with respect to, any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List shall (save as provided in section 72 of this Constitution) be to the exclusion of the legislatures of the Regions : Provided that nothing in this subsection shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making provision for grants or loans from or the imposition of charges upon any of the public funds of that Region or the imposition of charges upon the revenues and assets of that Region for any purpose notwithstanding that at relates to a matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List. (3) In addition and without prejudice to the powers conferred by subsection (1) of this section, Parliament shall have the powers to make laws conferred by sections 5, 65 to 69, 74 to 77 and 119 of the Constitution •(which relate to matters not included in the Legislative Lists).

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2423.

(4) If any law enacted by the legislature of a Region is inconsistent with any law validly made by Parliament, the law made by Parliament shall prevail and the Regional law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. (5) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, nothing in this section shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making laws with respect to any matter that is not included in the Exclusive Legislative List. Special powers of Parliament in relation to emergencies 65.—(l) Parliament may at any time make such laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to matters not included in the Legislative Lists as may appear to Parliament to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of maintaining or securing peace, order and good government during any period of emergency. (2) Any provision of law enacted in pursuance of this section shall have effect only during a period of emergency: Provided that the termination of a period of emergency shall not affect the operation of such a provision of law during that period, the validity of any action taken thereunder during that period, any penalty. or punishment incurred in respect of any contravention thereof or failure to comply therewith during that period or any proceeding or r emedy in respect of any such penalty or punishment. (3) In this section " period of emergency" means any period during which (a) the Federation is at war ; (I) there is in force a resolution passed by each House of Parliament declaring that a state of public emergency exists ; or (4) there is in force a resolution of each House of Parliament supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House declaring that democratic institutions in Nigeria arethndbysuvio. (4) A resolution passed by a House of Parliament for the purposes it of this section shall remain in force for twelve months or such shorter period as may be specified therein Provide that any such resolution may be revoked at any time or may be extended from time to time for a further period not exceeding twelve months by resolution passed in like manner. Special powers of Parliament when s. 80 of this Constitution has been
contravened 6.-(1)Duringayperiodnwhic ter isnforcea solutin of each House of

Parliament supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of that House declaring that the executive authority of a Region is being exercised in contravention of section 80 of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for that Region with repect to matters not included in the Legislative Lists to such extent as may appear to Parliament to be necessary for securing compli ance with the provisions of that section. (2) A resolution passed by a House of Parliament for the purposes of this section shall remain in force for twelve months or such shorter ein: period as may be specified ther Provided that such resolution may be revoked at any time or may be extended from time to time for a further period not exceeding twelve months by resolution passed in like manner.

NIGERIA

(3) Upon the expiration of any period during which there were in force resolutions of both Houses of Parliament passed for the purposes of this section, any provision of law enacted in pursuance of this section shall cease to have effect : Provided that the termination of any such period shall not affect the operation of such a provision of law during that period, the validity of any action taken thereunder during that period, any penalty or punishment incurred in respect of any contravention thereof or failure to comply therewith during that period or any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such penalty or punishment. Powers of Parliament conferred by Regional law 67.--(l) Parliament may at any time when there is in force a law enacted by the legislature of a Region conferring authority upon Parliament to do so make laws for that Region with respect to a matter not included in the Legislative Lists. (2) If any law enacted by the legislature of a Region conferring authority upon Parliament for the purposes of this section ceases to have effect, then any provision of law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it was enacted in pursuance of that authority, shall thereafter have effect as if it had been enacted by the legislature of that Region and may be amended or repealed accordingly. Power to make grants of money, etc., for any purpose 68. Parliament may make provision for grants and loans from and the imposition of charges upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation or for the imposition of charges upon the revenues and assets of the Federation for any purpose, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter not included in the Legislative Lists. Implementation of treaties, etc. 69. Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to matters not included in the Legislative Lists for the purpose of implementing any treaty, convention or agreement between the Federation and any other country or any arrangement with or decision of an international organization of which the Federation is a member: Provided that any provision of law enacted in pursuance of this section shall not come into operation in a Region unless the Governor of that Region has consented to its having effect. Income tax and estate duty 70.—(1) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to taxes on the income and profits of companies. (2) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part 'thereof with respect to taxes on income and profits other,than the income and profits of companies for the purpose of (a) implementing any treaty, convention or agreement between 11w Federation and any other country or any arrangement with or decision of an international 'organization of which the Federation is a member with respect to taxes on income 'and profits (b) securing uniform principles for the taxation of income and profits accruing to persons in Nigeria from countries other than Nigeria and of income and profits derived from Nigeria by persons outside Nigeria ;

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2425

(c) securing uniform principles for the computation of income and profits of all persons (including members of partnerships) for purposes of assessment of tax and for the treatment of losses, depreciation of assets and contributions to pension or provident funds or schemes ; (d) regulating the liability totax of persons within Nigeria' y reference to their places of residence or otherwise for the purpose of ensuring that any income or profit does not bear 'tax under the laws of more than one territory ; (e) providing, in pursuance of any arrangement in that behalf subsisting between the 'Government of 'the Federation and the Government of a Region, for the exemption from liability to tax in respect of all or part of the income or profits of any person or class of persons (f) obtaining information with respect to income or profits from any source and providing for the exchange of information between different tax authorities ; and (g) providing, in pursuance of any arrangement in that behalf subsisting between the Government of the Federation and the Government 'of 'a Region, for the establishment and regulation of authorities empowered to promote uniformity of taxation and to discharge such other functions relating to the taxation of income and profits as may 'be conferred upon them in pursuance of any such agreement. (3) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to taxes on the estates of deceased persons and the succession to their property for the purpose of ensuring that any estate or part thereof does not bear tax under the laws of more than one territory. t) The powers conferred upon Parliament by subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall not extend to the imposition of any tax or penalty or the prescribing of rates of tax or personal allowances and reliefs. (5) Nothing in subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making laws with respect to the matters reffered to in those subsection's. (6) In this section references to the income and profits of companies are references to the income and profits of any company or other corporation (other than a corporation sole) established by or under any law in force in Nigeria or elsewhere but do not include references (a) to the income and profits of any body corporate established by or under the Native Authority Law, 1954, of Northern Nigeria, , the Western Regional Local Government Law, 1952, or the Local Government Law, 1957, of Western Nigeria or the Eastern Region Local Government Law, 1960, of Eastern Nigeria, as amended, or any law replacing any of those laws (b) to the income and profits of any purchasing authority established by the legis lature of 'a Region and empowered to acquire any commodity in that Region for export from Nigeria derived from the ofthacmdiy;r purchase and sale (whether for purposes of export or otherwise)
(c) to the income or profits of any corporation established by the legis.

lature of a Region for the purpose 'of fostering the economic development of that Region, not being income or profits derived from a trade or business carried, on by that corporation or from

2426	

NIGERIA

any share or other interest possessed by that corporation in a trade or business in Nigeria carried on by some other person or authority. Trade and commerce 71.—(1) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to trade and commerce between Nigeria and other countries and trade and commerce among the territories, including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power) the export of commodities from Nigeria, the import of commodities into Nigeria, the establishment and enforcement of grades and standards of quality for commodities to be exported from Nigeria and the preservation of freedom of trade and commerce among the territories. (2) For the purposes of this section, Parliament may (a) confer on any person or authority exclusive power to acquire from a purchasing authority established for a Region by the legislature of that Region any commodity for export from Nigeria, to export any commodity from Nigeria or to sell any commodity outside Nigeria ; or (b) make provision for the inspection of commodities to be exported from Nigeria at the port of shipment from Nigeria and for the enforcement of grades and standards of quality in respect of commodities so inspected. (3) The powers conferred upon Parliament by this section shall not include powers (a) to establish a purchasing authority for a Region ; (b) to confer on any person or authority power to acquire in a Region any commodity for export from Nigeria from any person or authority in that Region other than a purchasing authority established for that Region by the legislature of a Region ; (c) to regulate the prices to, be paid by a purchasing authority established by the legislature of a Region for commodities for export ; (d) to regulate or prohibit in a Region any processing of a commodity to be exported or any dealing with such a commodity other than its export from Nigeria ; or (e) to make provision for the enforcement in a Region of any grades or standards of quality for commodities to be exported, from Nigeria that may be established by Parliament. (4) Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding the legislature of a Region (a) from making provision for any of the matters referred to in subsection (3) of this section ; or (b) from conferring upon any' purchasing authority of the Region power to acquire .any commodity in the Region for purposes other than export from Nigeria. (5) In this section " purchasing authority " means, in relation .to Region, any person or authority empowered to purchase commodities for export in that Region. Banks and banking 72.—(1) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any pa r! with respect to banks and banking.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2427

(2) Nothing in this section shall preclude the legislature of a Region from establishing an authority for the purpose of carrying on (subject to and in compliance with any Act of Parliament for the time being in force and in particular any Act relating to banks and banking) the business of banking in Nigeria or elsewhere or from making such provision for the constitution of that authority and regulating the performance by that authority of its functions as is consistent with any Act of Parliament. Electricity and gas 73.—(l) Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to electricity or gas : Provided that nothing in this subsection shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making laws for that Region with respect to those matters. (2) The powers conferred on Parliament by this section shall not include powers (a) to prohibit or restrict the establishment by or on behalf of the Government of a Region of an agency for the manufacture, distribution or supply of electricity or gas in that Region ; or (b) to regulate the production, distribution or supply of electricity or gas by the Government of a Region or any such agency. (3) In this section " gas " does not include natural gas. Authorities empowered to administer trusts and estates 74. Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or an part thereof establishing and regulating authorities for the Federation with power— .(a) to administer trusts ; or (b) to apply for grants of representation in respect of the estates of deceased persons and to administer such estates : provided that nothing in this section shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making provision for similar authorities for that Region.
y

Exhibition of cinematograph films 75. Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof estab lishing and regulating authorities for the Federation with power to carry the exhibition out censorship of such of cinematograph films; films and to prohibit or restrict Provided that nothing in this section shall preclude the legislature of a Region from making provision for similar authorities for that Region. Exemption Regional taxes with respect to mining 76. Parliament may, for the purpose of implementing any agreement between Government of the Federation and any person relating to mining or matters connected therewith, provide for exempting that person in whole or in part from liability for any tax or rate imposed by or under a law enacted by the legislature of a Region with respect to any matter not included in the Legislative Lists : Provided that no person shall be granted any exemption in pursu ance of this section without prior consultation between the Government ' the Government of the Region concerned.
I to find

2428	
Evidence

NIGERIA

77. Parliament may make laws for Nigeria or any part thereof with respect to evidence in regard to matters not included in the Legislative Lists : Provided that an Act of Parliament enacted in pursuance of this section shall have effect in relation to any Region only to the extent that provision in that behalf is not made by the legislature of that Region.
CHAPTER VI EXECUTIVE POWERS

Exercise of executive authority of Federation 78.—(1) The executive authority of the Federation shall be vested in

Her Majesty. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive authority of the Federation may be exercised on behalf of Her Majesty by the Governor-General, either directly or through officers subordinate to him. (3), Nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities other than the Governor-General.
Extent of executive authority of Federation

79. The executive authority of the Federation shall extend to the execution and maintenance of this Constitution and to all matters with respect to which Parliament has for the time being power to make laws.
Executive authority of Regions

80. The executive authority of a Region shall extend to the execution and maintenance of the constitution of the Region and to all matters with respect to which the legislature of the Region has for the time being power to make laws but shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the Federation or to endanger the continuance of federal government in Nigeria.
Ministers of Government of Federation 81.—(1) There shall be a Prime Minister of the Federation, who

shall be appointed by the Governor-General. (2) Whenever the Governor-General has occasion to appoint a Prime Minister he shall appoint a member of the House of Representatives who appears to him likely to command the support of the majority of the members of the House. (3) There shall be, in addition to the office of Prime Minister, such other offices of Minister of the Government of the Federation as may be established by Parliament or, subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with t he advice of the Prime Minister. (4) Appointments to the office of Minister of the Government or the Federation other than the office of Prime Minister shall be made 1w the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Pr ime Minister. (5) A person shall not hold office at the same time both as a Minister of the Government of the Federation and as a Minister of the Government of a Region.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2429

(6) Subject to the provisions of subsection (11) of this section, a person who holds office as a Minister of the Government of the Federation for any period of four consecutive months without a member of the House of Representatives also being a Senator shall cease to be a Minister at the expiration of that period or, if that period expires at a time when Parliament is dissolved and he does not in the meantime become a Senator or a member of the House of Representatives, at the date on which Parliament first meets after that dissolution. (7) Subject to the provisions of subsection (11) of this section, a person who holds office as a Minister of the Government of the Federation and who is at no time while holding that office also a Senator or a member of the House of Representatives shall not be qualified for reappointment as such a Minister before Parliament is next dissolved after he ceases to hold that office, unless in the meantime he has become a Senator or a member of the House of Representatives. (8) The office of the Prime Minister shall become vacant (a) when, after any dissolution of the House of Representatives, the Prime Minister is informed by the Governor-General that the Governor-General is about to re-appoint him as Prime Minister or to appoint another person as Prime Minister ; or (b) if he ceases to be a member of the House of Representatives otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament. (9) The office of a Minister of the Government of the Federation her than the Prime Minister shall become vacant if the office of Prime Minister becomes vacant. (10) Subject to the provisions of subsections (8) and (9) of this section. the Ministers of the Government of the Federation shall hold daring the Governor-General's pleasure:\ Provide that(a)theGovrn-lsatemovhPriMnstfom oficeunlstaprhmePiMnstrolge comandstheuprfmjoiythebrsfHou it Representatives ; and (b) the Governor-General shall not remove a Minister other than the Minister from office except in accordance with the advice Prime of the Prime Minister. (11) The office of the Attorney-General of the Federation shall be u Minister of the Government of the Federation: Provide that-(a) the provisions of subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall apply in relation to a person holding that office ; (b) if the p erson holding that office is for any reason unable to per functions conferred upon him by this Constitution or any law those functions may be performed by such other person (whether or not that person is a Minister) as may from time to time be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister ; and (c) a person shall not be qualified to hold that office or to perform the functions conferred upon the person holding that office by this Constitution or any other law unless he is qualified for admission
or

2K2

as an advocate in Nigeria and has been so qualified for at least ten years. Establishment of Council of Ministers 82.—(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers for the Federation, whose function shall be to advise the Governor-General in the government of the Federation and which shall consist of the Prime Minister and such other persons, being Ministers of the Government of the Federation, as the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may from time to time appoint. (2) A person appointed as a member of the Council of Ministers shall vacate his seat in the Council if he ceases to be a Minister of the Government of the Federation or if the Gove rnor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, so directs. Collective responsibility 83.—(1) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to Parliament for any advice given to the Gove rnor-General by or under the general authority of the Council and for all things done by or under the authority of any Minister of the Government of the Federation in the execution of his office. (2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to (a) the appointment and removal from office of Ministers of the Government of the Federation, members of the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries to Ministers, the assignment of portfolios to Ministers or the authorization of another member of the Council of Ministers to perform the functions of the Prime Minister during absence or illness ; (b) the dissolution of Parliament ; or (c) the matters referred to in section 94 of this Constitution (which relates to the prerogative of mercy). Allocation of portfolios to Ministers 84. The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister of the Government of the Federation re sponsibility for any business of the Government of the Federation, including the administration of any department of government. Performance of functions of Prime Minister during absence or illness 85 ._(1) Whenever the Prime Minister is absent from Nigeria or is by reason of illness unable to perform the functions conferred upon him by this Constitution the Governor-General may authorize some other member of the Council of Ministers of the Federation to perform those functions (other than the functions conferred by this section) and that member may perform those functions until his authority is revoked by the Governor-General. (2) The powers of the Governor-General under this section shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister Provided that if the Governor-General considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence he may exercise those powers without that advice. or illness Exercise of Governor-General's powers 86.—(1) In the exercise of his functions under this Constitution or any other law the Governor-General shall act in accordance with the

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2431

advice of the Council of Ministers or a Minister of the Government of the Federation acting under the general authority of the Council of Ministers except in cases where by this Constitution he is required to act in accordance with the advice of any person or authority other than the Council of Ministers : Provided that the Governor-General shall act in accordance with his own deliberate judgment in the performance of the following functions (a) in the exercise of the powers relating to the dissolution of Parliament conferred upon him by the proviso to subsection (4) of section 63 of this Constitution ; (b) in the exercise of the power to appoint the Prime Minister conferred upon him by subsection (2) of section 81 of this Constitution ; (c) in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by section 85 of this Constitution (which relates to the performance of the functions of the Prime Minister during absence or illness) in the circumstances described in the proviso to subsection (2) of that section ; and (d) in signifying his approval for the purposes of section 141 of this Constitution of an appointment to an office on his personal staff. (2) Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to act in accordance with the advice of any person or authority, the question whether he has in any case received, or acted in accordance with, such advice shall not be enquired into in any court of law. Governor-General to be informed concerning matters of government 87. The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the government of the Federation and shall furnish the Governor-General with such informatsheyquwitrpcoanyulmtering to the government of the Federation. Secretaries 88.—(1) The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice +41 the Prime Minister, may appoint Parliamentary Secretaries from among the Senators and the members of the House of Representatives to assist Ministers of the Government of the Federation in the performance of their duties. (2) The office of a Parliamentary Secretary shall become vacant(a)ifhecstobmrfneothHusParlimen otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament ; (b) if the office of Prime Minister becomes vacant ; or (c) if the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of tht . Prime Minister, so directs. Oaths to be taken by Ministers, etc. 89. A member of the Council of Ministers, Minister of the +,t the Federation or Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister shalnoterup'disfhoceunl astkd subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution oPmhioaeyfbripcsecnfadstlime. secretaries 90.Wher any Minister of the Government of the Federation has been charged with with responsibility for an y department of government. he

2432	

NIGERIA

shall exercise general direction and control over that department ; and, subject to such direction and control, the department shall be under the supervision of a permanent secretary, whose office shall be an office in the public service of the Federation: Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary. Constitution of offices for Federation, etc. 91. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, the Governor-General, in Her Majesty's name and on Her Majesty's 'behalf, may constitute offices for the Federation, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment. Delegation of executive authority of Federation 92.—(1) The Governor-General may, with the consent of the Governor of a Region, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to the Governor or to any officer or authority of that Region functions in relation to any matter to which the executive authority of the Federation extends falling to be performed within that Region: Provided that the consent of the Governor shall not be required during any such period as is referred to in section 65 or 66 of this Constitution. (2) An Act of Parliament may include provision conferring powers or imposing duties, or authorizing the conferring of powers or the imposition of duties, upon the Governor of a Region or any officer or authority of a Region: Provided that, save during any such period as is referred to in section 65 or 66 of this Constitution, no provision made in pursuance of this section shall have effect in relation to any Region unless the Governor has consented to its having effect. Delegation of executive authority of Region 93.—(l) The Governor of a Region may, with the consent of the Governor-General, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to the Governor-General or to any officer or authority of the Federation functions in relation to any matter to which the executive authority of the Region extends. (2) A law enacted by the legislature of a Region may include provision conferring powers or imposing duties, or authorizing the conferring of powers or the imposition of duties, upon the Governor-General or any officer or authority of the Federation: Provided that no provision made in pursuance of this subsection shall have effect unless the Governor-General has consented to its having effect. Prerogative of mercy 94.—(l) The Governor-General may, in Her Majesty's name and on Her Majesty's behalf (a) grant to any person concerned in or convicted of any offence created by or under an Act of Parliament a pardon. either free subject to lawful conditions ; (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence ;

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2433

(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence ; or (d) remit the whole or any part of any punishment imposed on that person for such an offence or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the Crown on account of such an offence. (2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, the powers of the Governor-General under subsection (1) of this section shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of such member of the Council of Ministers as may from time to time be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (3) In relation to persons concerned in offences against naval, military or air-force law or convicted or sentenced by courts-martial, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may designate a member of the Council of Ministers other than the member designated for the purposes of subsection (2) of this section and at any time when there is another member so designated the powers of the Governor-General under subsection (1) of this section shall, in relation to such persons, be exercised in accordance with the advice of that other member. (4) The provisions of this section shall apply (a) in relation to any offence created by or under any law in force in the Federal territory, not being an offence created by or under an Act of Parliament ; and (h) in relation to any offence created by or under any law in force in a Region relating to any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List or the Concurrent Legislative List, not being an offence created by or under an Act of Parliament or a law made by the Legislature of that Region, as they apply in relation to an offence created by or under an Act of P liament.
ar

Establishmen of Advisory Council on Prerogative of Mercy (a) 95.-- (1) There shall be for the Federation an Advisory Council on Prerogative of Mercy, which shall consist ofuch member of the Council of Ministers of the Federation as may for the time being be designated under subsection (2) of section 94 of this Constitution, who shall be chairman ; t where the chairman is a Minister other than the Attorney-General (c) not 4 of the Federation, the Attorney-General ; and shall less than five and not more than seven other members, who with shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance the advice of the Prime Minister, of whom at least one shall be a person who is qualified to practise as a medical practitioner in
s

person shall not be qualified for appointment by the GovernorGeneral as a member of the Advisory Council if he is a member of Region, either House of Parliament, a member of a legislative house of a a Minister of the Government of the Federation or a Minister of the Government of a Region. A member of the Advisory Council appointed by the Governor	 General shall hold	 office. three years :
(2) A (3) for

2434	

NIGERIA

Provided that his seat on the Council shall become vacant (a) if any circumstances arises that, if he were not a member of the Council, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such ; or (b) if he is removed from office by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. Functions of Advisory Council 96.—(1) Where any person has been sentenced to death by any court of law in Nigeria other than a court-martial for any offence created by or under an Act of Parliament the member of the Council of Ministers designated under subsection (2) of section 94 of this Constitution shall cause a written report of the case from the trial judge, together with such other information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as the member may require, to be taken into consideration at a meeting of the Advisory Council ; and after obtaining the advice of the Council the member shall decide in his own deliberate judgment whether to recommend to the Governor-General that he should exercise any of his powers under that section in relation to that person. (2) The member of the Council of Ministers designated under subsection (2) of section 94 of this Constitution may consult with the Advisory Council before making any recommendation to the GovernorGeneral under that subsection in any case not falling within subsection (1) of this section but he shall not be obliged to act in accordance with the advice of the Council. (3) The Advisory Council may regulate its own procedure. Public prosecutions 97.—(1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions for the Federation, whose office shall be an office in the public service of the Federation. (2) The Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation shall have power in any case in which he considers it desirable so to do (a) to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court of law in Nigeria other than a court-martial in respect of any offence created by or under any Act of Parliament ; (b) to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that may have been instituted by any other person or authority ; and (c) to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by himself or any other person or authority. (3) The powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation under subsection (2) of this section may be exercised by him in person or through members of his staff acting under and in accordance with his general or special instructions. (4) The Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation may confer a general or special authority upon the Director of Public Prosecutions of a Region to exercise, subject to such conditions and exceptions as he may think fit, any of the powers conferred upon him by subsection (2) of this section in relation to prosecutions in that Region and may vary or revoke any such authority.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2435

(5) The powers conferred upon the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation by paragraphs (b) and (c) of subsection (2) of this section shall be vested in him to the exclusion of any other person or authority : Provided that, where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority at any stage before the person against whom the proceedings have been instituted has been charged before the court. (6) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this section the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. (7) For the purposes of this section any appeal from any determination in any criminal proceedings before any court of law or any case stated or question of law reserved for the purposes of any such proceedings to any other court or to Her Majesty in Council shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings. (8) The provisions of this section shall apply (a) in relation to any offence created by or under any law in force in the Federal territory, not being an offence created by or under an Act of Parliament ; and (b) in relation to any offence created by or under any law in force in a Region relating to any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List or the Concurrent Legislative List, not being an offence created by or under an Act of Parliament or a law made by the Legislature of that Region, Its they apply in relation to an offence created by or under an Act of Parliament.
CHAPTER

VII

POLICE

Establishment of Nigeria Police Force 98.—(l) There shall be a police force for Nigeria, which shall be styled the Nigeria Police Force. (2 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Nigeria Police force shall be organized and administered in accordance with such provision as may be made in that behalf by Parliament. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the members of the Nigeria Police Force shall have such powers and duties as may be conferred upon them by any law in force in Nigeria. (4) Subject to the provisions of this section, no police forces other part thereof., thanthe Nigeria Police Force shall be established for Nigeria or any (5) Parliament may make provision for police forces forming part of the armed-forces of the Crown or for the protection of harbours, waterways, railways and airfields. (6) Parliament may make provision for the maintenance by any local authority within the Federal territory of a police force for employ.ment within the Federal territory (7) Nothing in this section shall prevent the legislature of a Region from making provision for the maintenance by any native authority or local-government authority established for a province or any part of a province of a police force for employment within that province.
2K*

2436	

NIGERIA

(8) [n this section "province " means any area that was a province on the thirtieth day of September, 1954. Control of Nigeria Police Force 99.—(1) There shall be an Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police and a Commissioner of Police for each Region, whose offices shall be offices in the public service of the Federation. (2) The Nigeria Police Force shall be under the command of the Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police and any contingents of the Nigeria Police Force stationed in a Region shall, subject to the authority of the Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police, be under the command of the Commissioner of Police of that Region. (3) The Prime Minister or such other Minister of the Government of the Federation as may be authorized in that behalf by the Prime Minister may give to the Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police such directions with respect to the maintaining and securing of public safety and public order as he may consider necessary and the InspectorGeneral shall comply with those directions or cause them to be complied with. (4) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, the Commissioner of Police of a Region shall comply with the directions of the Premier of the Region or such other Minister of the Government of the Region as may be authorized in that behalf by the Premier with respect to the maintaining and securing of public safety and public order within the Region or cause them to be complied with: Provided that before carrying out any such directions the Commissioner may request that the matter should be referred to the Prime Minister or such other Minister of the Government of the Federation as may be authorized in that behalf by the Prime Minister for his directions. (5) The question whether any, and if so what, directions have been given under subsection (3) of this section shall not be enquired into in any court. Establishment of Nigeria Police Council 100,(1) There shall be a Nigeria Police Council, which shall consist of (a) such Minister of the Government of the Federation, who shall be chairman, as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister (b) such Minister of the Government of each Region as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Governor of that Region ; and (c) the chairman of the Police Service Commission of the Federation. (2) The Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police or such other officer of the Nigeria Police Force as he may designate shall attend the meetings of the Nigeria Police Council and, save for the purpose ()I' voting, may take part in the proceedings of the Council. Functions of Nigeria Police Council 101.—(1) The organization and administration of the Nigeria Police Force and all other matters relating thereto (not being matters relating to the use and operational control of the force or the appointment

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2437

disciplinary control and dismissal of members of the force) shall be under the general supervision of the Nigeria Police Council. (2) The Prime Minister shall cause the Nigeria Police Council to be kept fully informed concerning the matters under its supervision and shall cause the Council to be furnished with such information as the Council may require with respect to any particular matter under its supervision. (3) The Nigeria Police Council may make recommendations to the Government of the Federation with respect to any matter under its supervision ; and if in any case the Government acts otherwise than in accordance with any such recommendation, it shall cause a statement containing that recommendation and its reasons for acting otherwise than in accordance with that recommendation to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. Establishment of Police Service Commission 102.—(1) There shall be a Police Service Commission for the Federation, which shall consist of a chairman and not less than two and not more than four other members. (2) The members of the Police Service Commission of the Federation shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (3) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a member of the Police Service Commission of the Federation if he is a member of either House of Parliament, a member of a legislative house of a Region, a Minister of the Government of the Federation, a Minister of the Government of a Region or a member of the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region: Provided that a judge of the High Court of a territory may be appointed as a member of the Commission. (4) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member of the Police Service Commission of the Federation shall vacate his office (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment ;
Or

(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such. (5) A member of the Police Service Commission of the Federation may be removed from office by the Governor-General, acting in accordmice with the advice of the Prime Minister, for inability to discharge thefuncios (whetraisngfom yidr body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. (6) A member of the Police Service Commission of the Federation shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the p visions of this section. Appointments to Nigeria Police Force, etc. 103. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the Nigeria Police Force (including power to make appointments on pro and transfer and to confirm appointments) and to dismiss and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such shall vest in the Police Service Commission of the Federation : Poffices rovide that the Commission may, with the approval of the Prime 3Minister 01 and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, delegate
	

2 K* 2

2438	

NIGERIA

any of its powers under this section to any of its members or to the Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police or any other member of the Nigeria Police Force. (2) Before making any appointment to the office of Inspector-General of the Nigeria Police or removing the Inspector-General from office, the Police Service Commission of the Federation shall consult the Prime Minister and before making any appointment to the office of Commissioner of Police of a Region or removing the Commissioner from office the Commission shall consult the Premier of that Region.
CHAPTER VIII COURTS

Part 1 The Federal Supreme Court Establishment of Federal Supreme Court 104.—(1) There shall be a Federal Supreme Court. (2) The judges of the Federal Supreme Court shall be-(a) the Chief Justice of the Federation ; (b) such number of Federal Justices (not being less than three) as may be prescribed by Parliament ; and (c) the Chief Justice of each territory. (3) The Federal Supreme Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court. (4) The Federal Supreme Court shall sit in the Federal territory and in such other places in Nigeria as the Chief Justice of the Federation may appoint. Appointment of Chief Justice of Federation and Federal Justices 105.—(1) The Chief Justice of the Federation shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (2) The Federal' Justices shall be appointed by the GovernorGeneral, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation. (3) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of Chief Justice of the Federation or a Federal Justice unless (a) he is or has been a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ; or (b) he is qualified for admission as an advocate in Nigeria and he has been so qualified for not less than ten years: Provided that in computing the period during which any person has been qualified as an advocate any period during which he has held office as a judge or magistrate after becoming so qualified shall be included. (4) If the office of Chief Justice of the Federation is vacant or if the person holding the office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of the office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person

i

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2439

holding the office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the other judges of the Federal Supreme Court as may from time to time be designated in that behalf by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (5) If the office of any Federal Justice is vacant or if the person holding the office is acting as Chief Justice of the Federation or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the GovernorGeneral, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation, may appoint a person qualified to hold the office of a Federal Justice to act in the office of a Federal Justice and any person so appointed shall continue to act for the period of the appointment or if no period is specified until his appointment is revoked by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Commission: Provided that a person may act as a Federal Justice notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of subsection (1) of section 106 of this Constitution. Tenure of office of Chief Justice of Federation and Federal Justices 106.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the office of Chief Justice of the Federation or a Federal Justice shall vacate that office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by Parliament: Provided that the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may permit a judge to continue in office for such period after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age. (2) A person holding the office of Chief Justice of the Federation or a Federal Justice may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not (be 3 so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this section. ) A person holding the office of Chief Justice of the Federation or a Federal Justice shall be removed from office by the Governor-General oif fthe the question of the removal of that judge from office has, at the request Governor-General made in pursuance of subsection (4) of this section, been referred by Her 'Majesty to the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council under any enactment enabling Her Majesty to that behalf and the Judicial Committee has advised Her Majesty misbehavour. shut die judge ought to be removed from office for inability or (4) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor-General that the question of removing a judge of the Federal Supreme Court under this ought to be investigated, then (a) the Governor-General shall appoint a tribunal consisting of a chairman and not less than two other members selected by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the as a Minister, from among persons who hold or have held office Prime judge criminal of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and I matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ;

(b) that tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and recommend to the GovernorGeneral whether he should request that the question of the removal of that judge should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee ; and (c) if the tribunal so recommends, the Governor-General shall request that the question should be referred accordingly. (5) If the question of removing a judge of the Federal Supreme Court from office has been referred to .a tribunal under this section, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, and shall in any case cease to have effect (a) if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that he should not request that the question of the removal of the judge from office should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee ; or (b) if the Judicial Committee advises Her Majesty that the judge ought not to be removed from office. (6) This section shall apply to any person appointed to act in the office of a Federal Justice as it applies to a person holding the office of a Federal Justice, but without prejudice to the provisions of section 105 of this Constitution relating to the revocation of his appointment by the Governor-General. Original jurisdiction of Federal Supreme Court 107.—(1) The Federal Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Federation and a Region or between Regions if and in so far as that dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends. (2) In addition to the jurisdiction conferred upon it by subsection (1) of this section, the Federal Supreme Court shall have such original jurisdiction as may be conferred upon it by any Act of Parliament : Provided that no original jurisdiction shall be conferred upon the Federal Supreme Court with respect to any criminal matter. Questions as to interpretation of this Constitution 108.—(1) Where any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the constitution of a Region arises in any proceedings in any court of law in any part of Nigeria (other than the Federal Supreme Court, the High Court of a territory or a court-martial) and the court is of opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law, the court may, and shall if any party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the High Court having jurisdiction in that part of Nigeria and the High Court shall (a) if it is of opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law, refer the question to the Federal Supreme Court ; or (b) if it is of opinion that the question does not involve a substantial question of law, remit the q uestion to the court that made the reference to be disposed of in accordance with such directions as the High Court may think fit to give.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2441

(2) Where any question as to the interpretation or this Constitution or the constitution of a Region arises in any proceedings in the High Court of a territory and the court is of opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law, the court may, and shall if any party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the Federal Supreme Court. (3) Where any question is referred to the Federal Supreme Court in pursuance of this section, the Federal Supreme Court shall give its decision upon the question and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the case in accordance with that decision. Advisory jurisdiction of Federal Supreme Court 109. Parliament may confer jurisdiction upon the Federal Supreme Court (a) to consider and advise upon any question upon which the Governor-General desires the assistance of the court for the purpose of deciding whether or not any of the powers vested in him by section 94 of this Constitution (which relates to the prerogative of mercy) should be exercised ; or (b) to consider and advise upon any question upon which the Governor of a Region desires the assistance of the court for the purpose 'of deciding whether or not any of the powers vested in him by the constitution of that Region with respect to the exercise of the prerogative of mercy should be exercised. Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from High Courts 110.--(1) The Federal Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction, to the exclusion of any other court of law in Nigeria, to hear and determine appeals from the High Court of a territory. (2) An appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court of a territory to the Federal Supreme Court as of right in the following cases (a) final decisions in any civil proceedings before the High Court sitting at first instance ; (h) where the ground of appeal involves questions of law alone, decisions in any criminal proceedings before the High Court sitting at first instance ; (r) decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the constitution of a Region ; decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings on questions as to whether any of the provisions of Chapter III of this Constitution has been contravened in relation to any person ; (e) decisions in any criminal proceedings in which any person has oribnewmhsctHdgoabyeihCurt Court has affirmed a sentence of death imposed by some other ; court ; and (/) such other cases as may be prescribed by any law in force in theProvide territory : that nothing in paragraph (a) of this subsection shall confer any right of appeal(i)fromanyde x parte; e ;(ii) from any order relating only to costs (iii) from any order made with the consent of the parties ; or

2442	

NIGERIA

(iv) in the case of a party to proceedings for 'dissolution or nullity of marriage who, having had time and opportunity to appeal from any decree nisi in such proceedings, has not so appealed, from any decree absolute founded upon such a decree nisi. (3) An appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court of a territory to the Federal Supreme Court as of right in the following cases (a) decisions on any such question as is referred to in section 48 of this Constitution ; or (b) decisions on any question whether any person has been validly selected or elected as a member of a legislative house of a Region Or the 'seat in a legislative house of a Region of any member of that house has become vacant, and the decision of the Federal Supreme Court upon any such question shall be final. (4) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court of a territory to the Federal Supreme Court with the leave of the High Court or the Federal Supreme Court in the following cases (a) where the ground of appeal involves questions of fact, mixed law and fact or quantum of sentence, decisions in any criminal proceedings before the High Court sitting at first instance ; (b) any case in which, but for the terms of the proviso to subsection (2) of this section, an appeal would lie as of right to the Federal Supreme Court by virtue of paragraph (a) of that subsection ; (c) decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings in which an appeal has been brought to the High Court from some other court ; and (d) such other, cases as may be prescribed by any law in force in the territory. (5) The Federal Supreme Court may dispose of any application for leave to appeal from any decision of the High Court of a territory in respect of any civil or criminal proceedings in which an appeal has been brought to the High Court from some other court of the territory upon consideration of the record of the proceedings if the Federal Supreme Court is of opinion that the interests of justice do not require an oral 'hearing of the application. (6) Any right of appeal to the Federal Supreme Court from the decisions of the High Court of a territory conferred by this section (a) shall 'be exercisable in the case of civil proceedings at the instance of a party thereto or, with the leave of the High Court or the Federal Supreme Court, at the instance of any other person having an interest in the matter and in the case of criminal proceedings at the instance of an accused person or, subject to the provisions of section 97 of this Constitution or any powers of 'the Director of Public Prosecutions of a Region to 'take over and continue or to discontinue such proceedings, at the instance of such other persons or authorities as may be prescribed by any law in force in the territory ; and (b) shall be exercised in accordance with any Acts of Parliament and rules of court for the time being in force in the territory regulating the powers, practice and procedure of the Federal Supreme Court.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2443

(7) In this section " decision " means, in relation to the High Court of a territory, any determination of that High Court and includes (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) a judgment, decree, order, conviction, sentence (other than a sentence fixed by law) or recommendation. Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from other Federal courts, etc. 111. Parliament may confer jurisdiction upon the Federal Supreme Court to hear and determine appeals from any decision of any court of law or tribunal established by Parliament. Appeals to Federal Supreme Court from Sharia Court of Appeal and Court of Resolution 112.—(1) An appeal shall lie from decisions of the Sharia Court of Appeal to the Federal Supreme Court as of right in the following cases (a) decisions on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the constitution of a Region ; (b) decisions on questions as to whether any of the provisions of Chapter III of this Constitution has been contravened in relation to any person ; and (c) such other cases as may be prescribed by any law in force in Northern Nigeria : Provided that nothing in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection (in so far as it applies to civil proceedings) shall confer any right of appeal with respect to any question relating to the respective jurisdiction of the High Court of Northern Nigeria and the Sharia Court of Appeal that the Court of Resolution is competent to determine. (2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (I) of this section, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the Sharia Court of Appeal or the Court of Resolution to the Federal Supreme Court with the leave of the Federal Supreme Court in such cases as may be prescribed by any law in force in Northern Nigeria. (3) Any right of appeal to the Federal Supreme Court from the decisions of the Sharia Court of Appeal conferred by this section (a) shall be exercisable at the instance of a party thereto or, with the leave of the Sharia Court of Appeal or the Federal Supreme Court, at the instance of any other person having an interest in the matter ; and (b) shall be exercised in accordance with any Acts of Parliament and rules of court for the time being in force in Northern Nigeria regulating the powers, practice and procedure of the Federal Supreme Court. (4) The Federal Supreme Court may dispose of any application for leave to appeal from any decision of the Sharia Court of Appeal or the Court of Resolution upon consideration of the record of the proceedings if the Federal Supreme Court is of opinion that the interests of justice do not require an oral hearing of the application. (5) In this section" the Court of Resolution " means the Court of Resolution established by the Court of Resolution Law, 1960, of Northern Nigeria, as amended, or any law replacing that law ; " decision " means, in relation to the Sharia Court of Appeal or the Court of Resolution, any determination of that court in any

2444	

NIGERIA

civil proceedings and includes (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) a judgment, decree, order or recommendation ; " the Sharia Court of Appeal " means the Sharia Court of Appeal established by the Sharia Court of Appeal Law, 1960, of Northern Nigeria, as amended, or any law replacing that law, Powers, practice and procedure of Federal Supreme Court 113.—(1) The decisions of the Federal Supreme Court shall be enforced in any part of Nigeria by the High Court having jurisdiction in that part of Nigeria and by all persons, authorities and other courts of law in that part as if they were decisions of that High Court. (2) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the Federal Supreme Court may make rules for regulating the practice and procedure of the court. (3) Parliament may make provision with respect to the practice and procedure of the Federal Supreme Court (including the service and execution of all civil and criminal processes of the Court) and may confer upon the Court such powers additional to those conferred by this section as may appear to be necessary or desirable for enabling the court more effectively to exercise its jurisdiction. (4) Rules made under this section may fix the minimum number of judges who may sit for any purpose, so however 'that no matter shall be finally determined by less than three judges : Provided that nothing in this subsection shall preclude a judge who does not concur in the opinion of the other judges from delivering a dissenting opinion. Part 2 Appeals to Her Majesty in Council Appeals from Federal Supreme Court to Her Majesty in Council 114.—(1) Subject to 'the provisions of this Constitution, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the Federal Supreme Court to Her. Majesty in Council as of right in the following cases (a) where the matter in dispute on the appeal to Her Majesty in Council is of the value of five hundred pounds or upwards or where the appeal involves directly or indirectly a claim to or question respecting property or a right of the value of five hundred pounds or upwards, final decisions in any civil proceedings ; (b) final decisions in proceedings for dissolution or nullity of marriage ; (c) final decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the constitution of a Region ; and (d) such other cases as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the Federal Supreme Court to Her Majesty in Council with the leave of the Federal Supreme Court in the following cases (a) where in the opinion of the Federal Supreme Court the question involved in the appeal is one that, by reason of its great general or public importance or otherwise, ought to be submitted to Her Majesty in Council, decisions in any civil proceedings ; and (b) in such other cases as may be prescribed by Parliament.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2445

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect any right of Her Majesty to grant special leave to appeal from decisions of the Federal Supreme Court to Her Majesty in Council in any civil or criminal matter. Part 3 The High Court of the Federal Territory Establishment of High Court of Lagos 115.—(1) There shall be a High Court for the Federal territory, which shall be styled the High Court of Lagos. (2) The judges of the High Court of Lagos shall be (a) the Chief Justice of Lagos ; and (b) such number of other judges (not being less than five) as may be prescribed by Parliament. (3) The 'High Court of Lagos shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers 'of such a court. Appointment of judges of High Court of Lagos 116.—(1) The Chief Justice of Lagos shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (2) The judges of the High Court of Lagos other than the Chief Justice shall 'be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation. (3) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a judge of the High Court of Lagos unless (a) he is or has been a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ; or (b) he is qualified for admission as an advocate in Nigeria and he has been so qualified for not less than ten years : Provided that in computing the period during which any person has been qualified to practise as an advocate any period during which he has held office as a judge or magistrate after becoming so qualified shall be included. (4) If the office of Chief Justice of Lagos is vacant or if the person holding the office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding the office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the other judges of the High Court of Lagos as may from time to time be designated in that behalf by I he Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (5) If the office of any judge of the High Court of Lagos other than the Chief Justice is vacant or if the person holding the office isactng 'ChefJusicorany ubletoprfmh functions of his office, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation, am, appoint a person 'with such qualifications as may be prescribed I Parliament to act in the office of a judge of the High Court and

any person so appointed shall continue to act for the period of the appointment or if no period is specified until his appointment is revoked by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Commission. Tenure of office of judges of High Court of Lagos 117.—(l) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the office of Chief Justice of Lagos or any other judge of the High Court of Lagos shall vacate his office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by Parliament: Provided that the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may permit a judge to continue in office for such period after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age. (2) A person holding the office of a judge of the High Court of Lagos may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (3) A person holding the office of a judge of the High Court of Lagos shall be removed from office by the Governor-General if the question of the removal of that judge from office has, at the request of the Governor-General made in pursuance of subsection (4) of this section, been referred 'by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee of Her Majesty's Privy Council under any enactment enabling Her Majesty in that behalf and the Judicial Committee has advised Her Majesty that the judge ought to be removed from office for inability or misbehaviour. (4) If the Prime Minister represents to the Governor-General that the question of removing a judge of the High Court of Lagos under this section ought to be investigated, then (a) the Governor-General shall appoint a tribunal consisting of a chairman and not less than two other members selected by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, from among persons who hold or have held office as a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ; (b) that tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and recommend to the Governor-General whether he should request that the question of the removal of that judge should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee ; and (c) if the tribunal so recommends, the Governor-General shall request that the question should be referred accordingly. (5) If the •question of removing a judge of the High Court of Lagos from office has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office and any such suspension 'may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the 'advice of the Prime Minister, and shall in any case cease to have effect (a) if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that he should not request that the question of the removal of the judge

from office should be referred by Her Majesty to the Judicial Committee ; or (b) if the Judicial Committee advises Her Majesty that the judge ought not to be removed from office. (6) This section shall apply to any person appointed to act in the office of a judge of the High Court as it applies to a person holding the office of a judge of the High Court, but without prejudice to the provisions of section 116, of this Constitution relating to the revocation of his appointment by the Governor-General. Appeals to High Court of Lagos from subordinate courts 118.—(1) An appeal shall lie from decisions of a subordinate court to the High Court of Lagos as of right or, if it is provided by Parliament that an appeal as of right shall lie from that subordinate court to another subordinate court, an appeal shall thereafter lie to the High Court as of right in the following cases (a) where the matter in dispute on the appeal to the High Court is of the value of fifty pounds or upwards or where the appeal involves directly or indirectly a claim to or question respecting property or a right of the value of fifty pounds or upwards, final decisions in any civil proceedings ; (b) where the ground of appeal to the High Court involves questions of law alone, decisions in any criminal proceedings in which any person has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding three months or corporal punishment exceeding six strokes or a fine or forfeiture exceeding twenty-five pounds by the subordinate court from which the appeal lies to the High Court or that subordinate court has affirmed or substituted such a sentence ; (c) decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution or the constitution of a Region ; (d) decisions in any civil or criminal proceedings on questions as to whether any of the provisions of Chapter III of this Constitution has been contravened in relation to any person ; (e) decisions in any criminal proceedings in which any person has been sentenced to death by the subordinate court from which the appeal lies to the High Court or in which that subordinate court has affirmed a sentence of death ; (f) decisions in any other criminal proceedings before a subordinate court sitting at first instance from which no appeal lies as of right to another subordinate court ; and (g) such other cases as may be prescribed by Parliament : Provided that no appeal shall lie from decisions of a subordinate court established under section 119 of this Constitution to the High. Court in any case in which an appeal lies as of right to the Federal Supreme Court by virtue of any Act of Parliament enacted in pursuance of section 111 of this Constitution. (2) An appeal shall lie from decisions of a subordinate court to the High Court of Lagos with the leave of the High Court or, if it is provided by Parliament that an appeal shall lie from that subordinate court to another subordinate court, an appeal shall thereafter lie to the High Court with the leave of the High Court in the following cases-

(a) decisions in any criminal proceedings from which no appeal lies as of right to the High Court ; and (b) such other cases in which no appeal lies as of right to the High Court as may be prescribed by Parliament: Provided that no appeal shall lie under paragraph (a) of this subsection from decisions of a subordinate court established under section 119 of this Constitution to the High Court in any case in which an appeal lies to the Federal Supreme Court (whether as of right or with the leave of the Federal Supreme Court) by virtue of an Act of Parliament enacted under section 111 of this Constitution. (3) Any right of appeal from decisions of a subordinate court to the High Court of Lagos conferred by this section (a) shall be exercisable in the case of civil proceedings at the instance of a party thereto or, with the leave of the High Court, at the instance of any other person having an interest in the matter and in the case of criminal proceedings at the instance of the accused person or, subject to the provisions of section 97 of this Constitution, at the instance of such other persons or authorities as may be prescribed by Parliament ; and (b) shall be exercised in accordance with any laws and rules of court for the time being in force regulating the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court. (4) In this section" decision " means, in relation to a subordinate court, any determination of that court and includes (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) a judgment, decree, order, conviction, sentence (other than a sentence fixed by law) or recommendation ; " subordinate court" means any court of law in the Federal territory other than the Federal Supreme' Court, the High Court of the territory or a court-martial. Part 4 General Establishment of courts 119. Parliament may establish courts of law for the Federation in addition to the Federal Supreme Court : Provided that nothing in this section shall (a) preclude the legislature of a Region from establishing courts of law for that Region ; or (b) confer upon Parliament powers to make provision with respect to the jurisdiction of any court established under this section additional to those conferred by the other provisions of this Constitution. Establishment of Judicial Service Commission 120.—(1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission for the Federation. (2) The members of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation shall be (a) the Chief Justice of the Federation, who shall be chairman (b) the Chief Justice of each territory ; (c) the chairman of the Public Service Commission of the Federation ; and

(d) one other member, who shall be appointed by the GovernorGeneral, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (3) The Chief Justices of the Regions shall not take part in the business of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation relating to the appointment of judges of the High Court of Lagos or members of any other court established for the Federal territory or any office connected with any such court and the member of the Commission appointed by the Governor-General and any person acting in the office of Chief Justice of a territory shall not 'take part in the business of the Commission relating to the appointment of Federal Justices. (4) The following provisions shall apply in relation to the member of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation appointed by the Governor-General (a) a person shall not be qualified for appointment as such unless he is or has been a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ; (b) subject to the provisions of this subsection, a person appointed as such shall vacate his office at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment ; (c) a person appointed as such may be removed from office by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour ; (d) a person appointed as such shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Appointment of officers connected with courts of Federation or Federal territory 121.—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices to which this section applies (including power to make appointments on promotion and transfer and to confirm appointments) and to dismiss and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices shall vest in the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation: Provided that the Commission may, with the approval of the Prime Minister and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, delegate any of its powers under this section to any of its members, to any judge or to the holder of any office to which this section applies. (2) The offices to which this section applies are the offices of members of any court of law established by Parliament for the Federation or the Federal territory (other than a court-martial) and such offices connected with the Federal Supreme Court, the High Court of Lagos or any court of law established by Parliament for the Federation or the Federal territory as may be prescribed by Parliament. Oaths to be taken by judges 122. A judge of the Federal Supreme Court or the High Court of Lagos shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament.

CHAPTER IX FINANCE

Part 1 Public funds of the Federation Establishment of Consolidated Revenue Fund 123.—(1) All revenues or other moneys raised or received by the Federation (not being revenues or other moneys payable under this Constitution or any Act of Parliament into some other public fund of the Federation established for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form one Consolidated Revenue Fund. (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation except to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament or where the issue of .those moneys has been authorized by an appropriation Act or an Act passed in pursuance of section 125 of this Constitution. (3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund of the Federation other than the Consolidated Revenue Fund unless the issue of those moneys has been authorized by an Act of Parliament. (4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation except in the manner prescribed by Parliament. Authorization of expenditure from Consolidated Revenue Fund 124.—(1) The Minister of the Government of the Federation responsible for finance shall cause to be prepared and laid before both Houses of Parliament in each financial year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of the Federation for the next following financial year. (2) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates (other than expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament) shall be included in a bill, to be known as an appropriation bill, providing for the issue from the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified therein. (3) If in respect of any financial year it is found (a) that the amount appropriated by the appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act ; or (b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for the purpose by the appropriation Act or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary appropriation bill. Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation 125. Parliament may make provision under which, if the appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister of

the Government of the Federation responsible for finance may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Act, whichever is the earlier. Contingencies Fund 126.—(1) Parliament may provide for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund for 'the Federation and for authorizing the Minister of the Government of the Federation responsible for finance, if satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from the Fund to meet that need. (2) Where any advance is made in accordance with subsection (1) of this section a supplementary estimate shall be presented and a supplementary appropriation bill shall be •introduced as soon as possible for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced. Remuneration of Governor-General and certain other officers 127.—(1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this section 'applies such salary as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) The salary and allowances payable to the holders of the offices to which this section applies shall be a charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation. (3) The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this section applies and his terms of office other than allowances shall not be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment. (4) This section applies to the office of Governor-General, Chief Justice of the Federation, Federal Justice, Chief Justice or other judge of the High Court of Lagos, member of the Electoral Commission of the Federation, appointed member of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation, member of the Public Service Commission of the Federation, member of the Police Service Commission of the Federation, Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation and Director of Audit of the Federation. Audit of public accounts 128.—(1) There shall be a Director of Audit for the Federation, whose office shall be an office in the public service of the Federation. (2) The public accounts of the Federation and of all officers, courts and authorities of the Federation shall be audited and reported on by the Director of Audit of the Federation and for that purpose the Director or any person authorized by him in that behalf shall have access to all books, records, returns and other documents relating to those accounts. (3) The Director of Audit of the Federation shall submit his reports to the Minister of the Government of the Federation responsible for finance, who shall cause them to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. (4) In the exercise of his functions under this Constitution the Director of Audit of the Federation shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

2452	

NIGERIA

Public debt 129.—(1) The public debt of the Federation shall be secured on the
revenues and assets of the Federation. (2) In this section references to the public debt of the Federation include references to the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt.

Part 2 Allocation of Revenue Import duties on certain commodities
130.—(1) Where under any Act of Parliament a duty is levied in respect of the import into Nigeria of any commodity other than motor spirit, diesel oil, tobacco, wine, potable spirits or beer, the Federation shall, in respect of each quarter, credit to a special account, maintained by the Federation and referred to in this Constitution as " the Distributable Pool Account ", a sum equal to thirty per cent. of the proceeds of that duty for that quarter. (2) For the purposes of this section the proceeds of a duty for a quarter shall be the amount remaining from the receipts from that duty that are collected in that quarter after any drawbacks, refunds or other repayments relating to those receipts have been made or allowed for.

Import duties on motor spirit and tobacco 131.—(1) (a) Where under any Act of Parliament a duty is levied
in respect of the import into Nigeria of motor spirit or diesel oil, or of any particular class, variety or description of motor spirit or diesel oil, there shall be paid by the Federation to the Regions in respect of each quarter a sum equal to the proceeds of that duty for that quarter. (b) When under paragraph (a) of this subsection any sum is payable by the Federation to the Regions in respect of any quarter, payment of the said sum shall be made in such manner that the sum is divided among the Regions in shares proportionate to the respective amounts of motor spirit or diesel oil, or of motor spirit or diesel oil of the particular class, variety or description in question, as the case may be, that have been distributed for consumption in the several Regions in the immediately preceding quarter. (2) (a) Where under any Act of Parliament a duty is levied in respect of the import into Nigeria of tobacco, or of any particular class, variety or description of tobacco, there shall be paid by the Federation to the Regions in respect of each quarter such sum as is equal to the proceeds of that duty for that quarter. (b) When under paragraph (a) of this subsection any sum is payable by the Federation to the Regions in respect of any quarter, payment of the said sum shall be made in such manner that the sum is divided among the Regions in shares proportionate to the respective amounts of tobacco, or of tobacco of the particular class, variety or description in question, as the case may be, that have been distributed for consumption in the several Regions in the immediately preceding quarter. (3) For the purposes of this section the proceeds of a duty for a quarter levied on any commodity, or any particular class, variety or

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2453

description of commodity, shall be the amount remaining from the receipts from that duty that are collected in that quarter after any drawbacks, refunds or other repayments relating to those receipts have been made or allowed for less the part of that amount that is attributable to quantities of that commodity or that class, variety or description of commodity distributed, or intended to be distributed, in the Federal territory. Excise duties 132.—(l) Where under any Act of Parliament an excise duty is levied on tobacco, or on any particular class, variety or description of tobacco, there shall be paid by the Federation to the Regions in respect of each quarter a sum equal to the proceeds of that duty for that quarter. (2) Where under subsection (1) of this section any sum is payable by the Federation to the Regions in respect of any quarter, payment of the said sum shall be made in such manner that the sum is divided among the Regions in shares proportionate to the respective amounts of the commodity in question that have been distributed for consumption in the several Regions in the immediately preceding quarter. (3) For the purposes of this section the proceeds for a quarter of a duty levied on tobacco or any particular class, variety or description of tobacco, shall be the amount remaining from the receipts from that duty that are collected in that quarter after any drawbacks, refunds or other repayments relating to those receipts have been made or allowed for, less the part of that amount that is attributable to quantities of tobacco or that particular class, variety or description of tobacco, distributed, or intended to be distributed, for consumption in the Federal territory. Export duties 133.—(1) Where under any Act of Parliament duty is levied in respect of the export from Nigeria of produce, hides or skins there shall be paid by the Federation to each Region in respect of each quarter a sum equal to the appropriate percentage of the proceeds of that duty for that quarter. (2) For the purposes of subsection (1) of this section (a) the proceeds for a quarter of a duty levied on a commodity shall be the amount remaining from such of the receipts from that duty as relate to exports of that commodity during that quarter after any drawbacks, refunds or other repayments relating to those receipts have been made or allowed for ; (b) the appropriate percentage of the proceeds for a quarter of a duty levied on a commodity shall, in relation to any Region, be whichever of the following percentages is prescribed by Parliament in that behalf, that is to say, either (1) the percentage of those proceeds that is attributable to exports of that commodity that were derived from that Region ; (ii) the percentage of those proceeds that is attributable to exports of that commodity that were purchased in that Region ; (iii) the percentage of those proceeds that bears the same proportion to the total amount of those proceeds as the amount of that commodity that was purchased for export in that Region

2454	

NIGERIA

during the quarter immediately preceding that quarter bears to that total amount of that commodity that was so purchased in all the Regions during that immediately preceding quarter ;
or

(iv) the percentage of proceeds that bears the same proportion to the total amount of those proceeds as the amount of that commodity that was purchased for export in that Region during the period of twelve months commencing three months before the commencement of the financial year in which that quarter falls bears to the total amount of that commodity that was so purchased in all the Regions during the period of twelve months. (3) Parliament may designate, or make provision for designating, any class, variety or description of any commodity as a separate commodity for the purposes of this section, and any such class, variety or description that is so designated shall be regarded as a separate commodity for those purposes. (4) For the purposes of this section any amount of a commodity that is derived from the Federal territory shall be deemed to be derived from Western Nigeria and any amount of a commodity that is purchased in the Federal territory shall be deemed to be purchased in Western Nigeria. Mining royalties and rents 134.—(l) There shall be paid by the Federation to each Region a sum equal to fifty per cent. of (a) the proceeds of any royalty received by the Federation in respect of any minerals extracted in that Region ; and (b) any mining rents derived by the Federation during that year from within that Region. (2) The Federation shall credit to the Distributable Pool Account a sum equal to thirty per cent. of „(a) the proceeds of any royalty received by the Federation in respect of minerals extracted in any Region ; and (b) any mining rents derived by the Federation from within any Region. (3) For the purposes of this section the proceeds of a royalty shall be the amount remaining from the receipts of that royalty after any refunds or other repayments relating to those receipts have been deducted therefrom or allowed for. (4) Parliament may prescribe the periods in relation to which the proceeds of any royalty or mining rents shall be calculated for the purposes of this section. (5) In this section " minerals " includes mineral oil. (6) For the purposes of this section the continental shelf of a Region shall be deemed to 'be part of that Region. Distribution of funds in Distributable Pool Account 135. There shall be paid by the Federation to the Regions at the end of each quarter sums equal to the following 'fractions of the amount standing to the credit of the Distributable Pool Account at that date, that is to say (a) to Northern Nigeria, forty ninety-fifths ;

Nigeria (Constitution)	 (b) to Western Nigeria, twenty-four ninety-fifths ; (c) to Eastern Nigeria, thirty-one ninety-fifths.
Regions to contribute towards costs of administration

2455

136. Each Region shall in respect of each financial year pay to the Federation an amount equal to such part of the expenditure incurred by the Federation during that financial year in respect of the department of customs and excise of the Government of the Federation for the purpose of collecting the duties referred to in sections 130, 131, 132 and 133 of this Constitution as is proportionate to the share of the proceeds of those duties received by that Region under those sections in respect of that financial year.
Set-off

137.—(1) Any sum that is required by this Chapter to be paid by the Federation to a Region may be set off by the Federation in or towards the payment of any sum that is due from that Region to the Federation in respect of any loan made by the Federation to that Region. (2) The right of set-off conferred by subsection (1) of this section shall be without prejudice to any other right of the Federation to obtain payment of any sum due to the Federation in respect of any loan.
Sums charged on Consolidated Revenue Funds

138. Any payments 'that are required by this Chapter to be made by the Federation to a Region shall be a charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation and any payments that are so required to be made by a Region to the Federation shall be a charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund of that Region.
Provisions with regard to payments

139.—(1) Where any payment falls to be made under this Part of this Chapter, the amount payable shall be certified by the Director of Audit of the Federation : Provided that a provisional payment may be made before the I Director has given his certificate. (2) Parliament may make provision as to time and manner in which any payment falling to be made under this Part of this Chapter shall be effected and for the making of adjustments and provisional to payments .
CHAPTER X THE PUBLIC SERVICE OF THE FEDERATION Establishment

of Public Service Commission

140. -(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for the Federa, which shall consist of a chairman and not less than two or more than four other members. (2) The members of the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall be appointed by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (3) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a member the Public Service Commission of the Federation if he is a member ,11114. r I louse of Parliament, a member of a legislative house of a to,n. :t Minister of the Government of the Federation, a Minister of

2456	

NIGERIA

the Government of a Region or the holder of an office in the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region. (4) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member of the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall vacate his office (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment ; or (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such. (5) A member of the Public Service Commission of the Federation may be removed from office by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. (6) A member of the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (7) A person who has been appointed to be a member of the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall not thereafter be eligible for appointment to any office in the public service of the Federation. Appointment, etc. of officers in public service 141.—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the public service of the Federation (including power to make appointments on promotion and transfer and to confirm appointments) and to dismiss and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices shall vest in the Public Service Commission of the Federation : Provided that the Commission may, with the approval of the Prime Minister and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, delegate any of its powers under this section to any of its members or to any officer in the public service of the Federation. (2) This section shall not apply in relation to any of the following offices (a) the office of any judge of the Federal Supreme Court or the High Court of Lagos ; (b) except for the purposes of making appointments thereto, the office of the Director of Audit of the Federation or the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation ; (c) any office in the Nigeria Police Force ; (d) any office to which section 121 of this Constitution (which relates to offices within the jurisdiction of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation) applies ; or (e) any office to which section 142 of this Constitution (which relates to the offices of the principal representatives of the Federation abroad) applies. (3) The provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of section 143 of this Constitution (which relates to permanent secretaries). (4) No appointment shall be made under this section to any office on the 'personal staff of the Governor-General unless the GovernorGeneral signifies his approval of the appointment.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2457

Appointment, etc. of principal representatives of Federation abroad 142.—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices to which this section applies (including power to make appointments on promotion and transfer) and to remove persons so appointed from any such office shall vest in the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (2) Before tendering any advice for the purposes of this section in relation to any person who holds any office in the public service of the Federation other than an office to which this section applies, the Prime Minister shall consult the Public Service Commission of the Federation. (3) The 'offices to which this section applies are the offices of any Ambassador, High Commissioner or other principal representative of the Federation in countries other than Nigeria. Appointment, etc. of permanent secretaries 143.—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the office of permanent secretary to any department of government of the Federation and to remove persons so appointed from that office shall vest in the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister. (2) Before tendering any advice for the purposes of this section the Prime Minister shall consult the Public Service Commission of the Federation. Qualifications of Director of Public Prosecutions 144. A person shall not be qualified to hold or act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation unless he is qualified for admission as an advocate in Nigeria and has been so qualified for at least ten years. Tenure of office of Director of Public Prosecutions 145.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation shall vacate that office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by I rliament. (2) A person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions if the Federation may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infinmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour and shall F u ji.notbesrmovedxcptinacordnewith eprovisnofthis section. (3) A person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions of theFderationshal bermovedfrom ficebythe Governor if the question of his removal from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under subsection (4) of this section and the Haul be has recommended to the Governor-General 'that he ought to r(emovd4f icnabltyormsehviu. (4) if the Prime Minister represents to the Governor-General that question of removing the Director of Public Prosecutions of the under this section ought to be investigated then (a) the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, shall appoint a tribunal, which shall consist
Pa

2458	

- NIGERIA

of a chairman and not less than two other members, the chairman and half of the other members being persons who hold or have held office as a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court ; and (b) that tribunal shall enquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Governor-General and recommend to the Governor-General whether the Director ought to be removed under this section. (5) If the question of removing the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation has been referred to a tribunal under this: section, the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may suspend the Director from performing the functions of his office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the Governor-General that the Director should not be removed.
Appointment and tenure of office of Director of Audit

146.—(l) Before appointing any person to hold the office of Director of Audit of the Federation the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall consult the Prime Minister. (2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the office of Director of Audit of the Federation shall vacate that office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by Parliament. (3) A person holding the office of Director of Audit of the Federation shall be removed from office by the Governor-General if a resolution is passed by each House of Parliament recommending his removal from office for inability to discharge the functions of his Ace (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour. (4) A person holding the office of Director of Audit of the Federation shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (5) If the office of Director of Audit of the Federation is vacant or the holder of the office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of the office, the Public Service Commission of the Federation, acting after consultation with the Prime Minister, may appoint a person to act in the office and any person so appointed shall continue to act until his appointment is revoked by the Commission acting after consultation with the Prime Minister.
Powers relating to Clerks of Houses of Parliament

147. Before exercising any of its powers in relation to the Clerk to the Senate the Public Service Commission of the Federation shall consult the President of the Senate and before exercising any of its powers in relation to the Clerk to the House of Representatives the Commission shall consult the Speaker of that House.
Protection of pension rights 148.—(1) The law applicable to any benefits to which this section

applies shall, in relation to any person who has been granted, or who is eligible for, such benefits, be that in force on the relevant date or any later law that is not less favourable to that person.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

245

(2) In this section " the relevant date " means (a) in relation to any benefits granted before this Constitution came into operation, the date on which those benefits were granted (b) in relation to any benefits granted after this Constitution came into operation to or in respect of any person who was a member of the public service of the Federation, the former public service of Nigeria, or the public service of a Region before this Constitution came into operation or any benefits for which any such person may be eligible, the thirtieth day of September, 1960 ; and (c) in relation to any benefits granted to or in respect of any person who first becomes a member of the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region after this Constitution came into operation or any benefits for which any such person may be eligible, the date on which he first became such a member. (3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option whichever one of two or more laws shall apply in his case, the law specified by him in exercising the option shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be more favourable to him than the other law or laws. (4) Any benefit to which this section applies that is payable by the Federation (not being a benefit that is a charge upon some other public fund of the Federation) shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Federation and any such benefit that is payable by a Region (not being a benefit that is a charge upon some other public fund of that Region) shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Revenue Fund of that Region. (5) This section applies to any benefits payable under any law in force in Nigeria or any part thereof providing for the grant of p ensions, gratuities or compensation to persons who are or have been members of the public service of the Federation, the former public service of Nigeria or the public service of a Region in respect of their service in any of those public services or to the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service.
Powers of Commissions in relation to grant of pensions, etc.

149.—(1) Where any benefits to which this section applies can be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended by any person or authority under any Act of Parliament, those benefits shall not be so withheld, educed in amount or suspended (a) in the case of benefits that have been granted in respect of the service in the public service of the Federation of any person who at the time when he ceased to be a member of that public service was subject to the jurisdiction of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation or for which any person may be eligible in respect Of (b such service, without the approval of that Commission ; (b)inthecasof vebngratdispcofhe service in the public service of the Federation of any person who at the time when he ceased to be a member of that public service swubjectoahridnfePolcSrviCmsn of the Federation or for which any person may be eligible in respctofsuchservice,without heaprovaloftha Comisn;r (c)i any other case, without the approval of the Public Service n 33001 Commission of the Federation. 	 (2)	 2L

(2) No benefits to which this section applies that have been granted to any person who holds or has held the office of a judge of the Federal Supreme Court or the High Court of Lagos or for which any such person may be eligible shall be 'withheld, reduced or suspended on the ground that that person has been guilty of misbehaviour while holding that office runless that person has been removed from that office by reason of such misbehaviour. (3) This section applies to any benefits payable under any Act of Parliament providing for the grant of pensions, gratuities or compensation to persons who are or have been members of the public service of the Federation or the former public service of Nigeria in respect of their service in that public service or to the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service.
CHAPTER XI MISCELLANEOUS

Powers and procedure of Federal Commissions

150.—(1) Any Commission established by this Constitution may, with the consent of the Prime Minister or such other Minister of the Government of the Federation as may be authorized in that behalf by the Prime Minister, by regulation or otherwise regulate its own procedure or confer powers and impose duties on any officer or authority of the Federation for the purpose of discharging its functions. (2) Subject to its rules of procedure, any Commission established by this Constitution may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership or the absence of any member Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof or, in the case of the Judicial Service Commission of the Federation, a majority of all the members thereof who are entitled to take part in the business to which the decision relates.
Resignations

151.—(1) Any person who is appointed, elected or otherwise selected to any office established by this Constitution may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed, elected or selected: Provided that in the case of a member of a House of Parliament who holds office as President or Speaker of the House his resignation from the House or that office shall be addressed to the House and in the case of any other member of the House his resignation from the House shall be addressed to the President or Speaker of the House. (2) The resignation of any person from any office established by this Constitution shall take effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received by the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person authorized by that person or authority to receive it.
Re-appointments, etc.

152.—(1) Where any person has vacated any office constituted by this Constitution, he may, if qualified, again be appointed, elected or otherwise selected to hold that office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2461

(2) Where by this Constitution a power is conferred upon any person or authority to make any appointment to any office in the public service of the Federation, a person may be appointed to that office notwithstanding that some other person may be holding that office, when that other person is on leave of absence pending relinquishment of the office ; and where two or more persons are holding the same office by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of this subsection, then for the purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that office the person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder of the office. Review of ss. 134 and 135 of this Constitution 153. The Government of the Federation, acting after consultation with the Governments of the Regions, shall from time to time appoint a Commission to review and make recommendations with respect to the provisions of sections 134 and 135 of this Constitution. Interpretation 154----(1) In this Constitution, unless it is otherwise expressly provided or required by the context" Act of Parliament " means any law made by Parliament ; " the Advisory Council " means the Advisory Council on the Prerogative of Mercy of the Federation ; " the Commonwealth " means Nigeria, any country to which section 13 of this Constitution applies and any dependency of any such country ; " the Concurrent Legislative List " means the list in Part II of the Schedule to this. Constitution ; " the Exclusive Legislative List " means the list in Part I of the Schedule to this Constitution ; " financial year " means any period of twelve months beginning on the first day of April in any year or such other date as Parliament may prescribe ; " the Legislative Lists " means the Exclusive Legislative List and the Concurrent Legislative List ; " oath " includes affirmation ; " the oath of allegiance " means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by Parliament ; " Parliament " means the Parliament of the Federation ; " produce " means such animal or vegetable products, whether processed or in a natural state (other than tobacco, hides or skins) as may with the consent of the Governments of the Regions be designated by the Governor-General by order ; " the public service of the Federation " means the service of the CI own in a civil capacity in respect of the government of the Federation ; " territory " means a Region or the Federal territory ; quarter " means a quarter of a financial year. (2) In this Constitution, unless it is otherwise expressly provided o r required by the context(a ) references to persons holding offices in the public service of the Federation or the public service of a Region include references to persons acting in those offices ; and 301
	2 L 2

(b) references to offices in the public service of the Federation include references to the offices of the judges of the Federal Supreme Court and the High Court of Lagos and references to the offices of members of all other courts of law established by Parliament (other than courts-martial), being offices the emoluments attaching to which are paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation, and references to the offices of members of the Nigeria Police Force. (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, the office of the President or the Deputy President of the Senate, a Senator, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, a member of the House of Representatives, a Minister of the Government of the Federation, a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister or a member of the Council of Ministers, the Nigeria Police Council, any Commission established by this Constitution or the Advisory Council shall not be regarded as an office in the public service of the Federation. (4) The Interpretation Act, 1889(a), as in force on the first day of October, 1960, shall apply, with the necessary adaptations, for the purpose of interpreting this Constitution and otherwise in relation thereto as it applies for the purposes of interpreting, and in relation to, Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. (5) No provision of this Constitution that any person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in exercising any functions under this Constitution shall be construed as precluding a court of law from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.
Section 154.	 THE SCHEDULE
THE LEGISLATIVE LISTS

Part I The Exclusive Legislative List Item 1. 2. 3.. 4. 5. Accounts of the Government of the Federation and officers, courts and authorities thereof, including audit of those accounts. Archives, other than the public records of the Governments of the Regions since the twenty-third day of January, 1952. Aviation, including airports, safety of aircraft and ancillary transport and other services. Bills of exchange and promissory notes. Borrowing of moneys outside Nigeria for the purposes of the Federation or of any Region other than borrowing by the Government of a Region for a period not exceeding twelve months on the security of any funds or assets of that government held outside Nigeria. Borrowing of moneys within Nigeria for the purposes of the Federation.. Control of capital issues. Copyright. Currency, coinage and legal tender. Customs and excise duties, including export duties. Defence. Deportation ; compulsory removal of persons from one territory to another. Designation of securities in which trust funds may be invested. (a) 52 & 53 Vict. c. 63.

6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.

Nigeria (Constitution)	
Item

2463

14. Exchange control. 15. External affairs. 16. Extradition. 17. The following higher educational institutions, that is to say— The University College at Ibadan. The, University College Teaching Hospital. The Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology. The West African Institute of Social and Economic Research. The Pharmacy School at Yaba. The Forest School at Ibadan. The Veterinary School at Vom. 18. Immigration into and emigration from Nigeria. 19. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of bodies corporate, other than co-operative societies, native authorities, local-government authorities and bodies corporate established directly by any law enacted by the legislature of a Region. 20. Insurance other than insurance undertaken by the Government of a Region but including any insurance undertaken by the Government of a Region that •extends beyond the limits of that Region. 21. Legal proceedings between the Government of the Federation and any other person or authority or between the Governments of Regions. 22. Maritime shipping and navigation, including (a) shipping and navigation on tidal waters ; (b) shipping and navigation on the River Niger and its affluents and on any such other inland waterway as may be declared by Parliament to be an international waterway or to be an interRegional waterway ; (c) lighthouses, lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of shipping and navigation ; (d) such ports as may be declared by Parliament to be Federal ports (including the constitution and powers of port authorities for Federal ports). 23. Marriages other than marriages under Moslem law or other customary law ; annulment and dissolution of, and other matrimonial causes relating to, marriages other than marriages under Moslem law or other customary law. 24. Meteorology. 25. Mines and minerals, including oilfields, oil mining, geological surveys and natural gas. 26. Museums of the Federation, that is to say The Jos Museum. The Oron Museum. The House of Images at Esie. Any other museums established by the Government of the Federation. 27. Naval, military and air forces. 28. Nuclear energy. 29. Passports and visas. . 30.. Patents, trade marks, designs and merchandise marks 31. Pensions, gratuities and other like benefits payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation. 32. Posts, telegraphs and telephones, including post office savings banks. 33. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and its members.

2462	

NIGERIA

(b) references to offices in the public service of the Federation

include references to the offices of the judges of the Federal Supreme Court and the High Court of Lagos and references to the offices of members of all other courts of law established by Parliament (other than courts-martial), being offices the emoluments attaching to which are paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation, and references to the offices of members of the Nigeria Police Force. (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, the office of the President or the Deputy President of the Senate, a Senator, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, a member of the House of Representatives, a Minister of the Government of the Federation, a Parliamentary Secretary to such a Minister or a member of the Council of 'Ministers, the Nigeria Police Council, any Commission established by this Constitution or the Advisory Council shall not be regarded as an office in the public service of the Federation. (4) The Interpretation Act, 1889(a), as in force on the first day, of October, 1960, shall apply, with the necessary adaptations, for the purpose of interpreting this Constitution and otherwise in relation thereto as it applies for the purposes of interpreting, and in relation to, Acts of the •Parliament of the United Kingdom. (5) No provision of this Constitution that any person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in exercising any functions under this Constitution shall be construed as precluding a court of law from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law. Section 154. 	 THE SCHEDULE
THE LEGISLATIVE LISTS

Part I The Exclusive Legislative List Item
1. Accounts of the Government of the Federation and officers, courts and authorities thereof, including audit of those accounts. Archives, other than the public records of the Governments of the Regions since the twenty-third day of January, 1952. 3. Aviation, including airports, safety of aircraft and ancillary transport and other services. 4. Bills of exchange and promissory notes. 5. Borrowing of moneys outside Nigeria for the purposes of the Federation or of any Region other than borrowing by the Government of a Region for a period not exceeding twelve months on the security of any funds , or assets of that government held outside Nigeria. 6. Borrowing of moneys within Nigeria for the purposes of the Federation.. 7. Control of capital issues. 8. Copyright. 9. Currency, coinage and legal tender. 10. Customs and excise duties, including expert duties. 11. Defence. 12. Deportation ; compulsory removal of persons from one territory to another. 13. Designation of securities in which trust funds may be invested. (a) 52 & 53 Vict. c. 63.

Nigeria (Constitution)	
Item

2463

14. Exchange control. 15. External affairs. 16. Extradition. 17. The following higher educational institutions, that is to say— The University College at Ibadan. The University College Teaching Hospital. The Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology. The West African Institute of Social and Economic Research. The Pharmacy School at Yaba. The Forest School at Ibadan. The Veterinary School at Vom. 18. Immigration into and emigration from Nigeria. 19. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of bodies corporate, other than co-operative societies, native authorities, local-government authorities and bodies corporate established directly by any law enacted by the legislature of a Region. 20. Insurance other than insurance undertaken by the Government of a Region but including any insurance undertaken by the Government of a Region that extends beyond the limits of that Region. 21. Legal proceedings between the Government of the Federation and any other person or authority or between the Governments of Regions. 22. Maritime shipping and navigation, including (a) shipping and navigation on tidal waters ; (b) shipping and navigation on the River Niger and its affluents and on any such other inland waterway as may be declared by Parliament to be an international waterway or to be an inter'Regional waterway ; (c) lighthouses, lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of shipping and navigation ; (d) such ports as may be declared by Parliament to be Federal ports (including the constitution and powers of port authorities for Federal ports). 23. Marriages other than marriages under Moslem law or other customary law ; annulment and dissolution of, and other matrimonial causes relating to, marriages other than marriages under Moslem law or other customary law. 24. Meteorology. 25. Mines and minerals, including oilfields, oil mining, geological surveys and natural gas. 26. Museums of the Federation, that is to say The Jos Museum. The Oron Museum. The House of Images at Esie. Any other museums established by the Government of the Federation. 27. Naval, military and air forces. 28. Nuclear energy. 29. Passports and visas. 30. Patents, trade marks, designs and merchandise marks. 31. Pensions, gratuities and other like, benefits payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund or any other public fund of the Federation. 32. Posts, telegraphs and telephones, including post office savings banks. 33. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament an d its members.

2464

	

NIGERIA

Item 34. The public debt of the Federation. 35. Public relations of the Federation. 36. The public service of the Federation, including the settlement of disputes between the Federation and officers in the public service of the Federation. 37. Railways, including ancillary transport and other services. 38. Taxes on amounts paid or payable on the sale or purchase of commodities except (a) produce ; (b) hides and skins ; (c) motor spirit (d) diesel oil sold or purchased for use in road vehicles ; (e) diesel oil sold or purchased for other than industrial purposes. 39. Trunk roads, that is to say, the construction, alteration and maintenance of such roads as may be declared by Parliament to be Federal trunk roads. 40. Water from such sources as may be declared by Parliament to be sources affecting more than one territory. 41. Weights and measures. 42. Wireless, broadcasting and television other than broadcasting and television provided by the Government of a Region ; allocation of wavelengths for wireless, broadcasting and television transmission. 43. The matters with respect to which Parliament is empowered to make provision by sections 4, 8, 9, 12, 15, 31, 34, 37, 40, 44, 47, 63, subsection (1) of section 70, sections 71, 72, 81, 89, subsections (2) and (5) of •section 98 and sections 104, 106, 109, 111, 113, 114, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 133, 134, 139, 145, 146 and 154 of this Constitution. 44. Any matter that is incidental or supplementary (a) to any matter referred to elsewhere in this list ; or (b) to the discharge by the Government of the Federation or any officer, court or authority of the Federation of any function conferred, by this Constitution.
Part II The Concurrent Legislative List

Antiquities. Arms and ammunition. Bankruptcy and insolvency. Census. Chemical services, including analytical services. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts. Control of the voluntary movement of persons between territories. Such drugs and poisons as may with the consent of the governments of the Regions be designated by the Governor-General by order. 9. Fingerprints, identification and criminal records. 10. Higher education, that is to say, institutions and other bodies offering courses or conducting examinations of a university, technological or of a professional character, other than the institutions referred to in Item 17 of Part I of this Schedule. 11. Industrial development. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.

Nigeria (Constitution)	

2465

Item 12. Labour, that is to say, conditions of labour, industrial relations, trade unions and welfare of labour. 13. The legal and medical professions and such other professional occupations as may with the consent of the governments of the Regions be designated by the Governor-General by order. 14. National monuments, that is to say, such monuments in a Region as may with the consent of the Government of that Region be designated by the Governor-General by order as national monuments. 15. National parks, that is to say, the control of such areas in a Region as may with the consent of the Government of that Region be designated by the Governor-General by order as national parks.. 16. Prisons and other institutions for the treatment of offenders. 1'7. Promotion of tourist traffic. 18. The maintaining and securing of public safety and public order ; the providing, maintaining and securing of such supplies and services as may be designated by the Governor-General by order as essential supplies and services. 19. Quarantine. 20. Registration of business names 21. Scientific and industrial research. 22. Service and execution in a Region of the civil and criminal processes, judgments, decrees, orders and other decisions of any court of law outside Nigeria or any court of law in Nigeria other than the Federal Supreme Court, the High Court of that Region or any court of law established by the legislature of that Region. 23. Statistics. 24. Traffic on Federal trunk roads. 25. Trigonometrical, cadastral and topographical surveys. 26. water-power. 27. The matters with respect to which Parliament is empowered to make provision by subsections (2) and (3) of section 70 and section 73 Constitution. of this 28. Any matter that is incidental or supplementary to any matter referred to in this list. Part III 1. Interpretation In this Schedule references to incidental and supplementary matters (a) include, offences; without prejudice to their generality (b) the jurisdiction, powers, practice and procedure of courts of law ; (c) the compulsory acquisition and tenure of land ; and (d) the establishment and regulation of tribunals of enquiry. 2. Where by this Schedule Parliament is empowered to make any declaration that declaration may be made by resolutions passed by both Houses of Parliament instead by Act of Parliament,

