' COMPILED BY THE LIBRAIII N AND KEEPER OF THE PAPERS,

FOREIGN OFFICE.

Lonbon:
PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN S LANE

PARAGUAY.

	

751

LAW of Paraguay, which establishes the Political Administration of the Republic —Assumption, March 16, 1844.

(Translation.)
CHAPTER 1.—Of the General Administration. ART. I. The general administration of the Republic shall henceforward be exercised by a Congress or National Legislature of Deputies, Representatives of the Republic ; by a President, in whom the supreme Executive Power resides, and by the tribunals and judges established by the law of the Sovereign Extraordinary Congress of 25th November, 1842. II. The power of enacting, expounding and abrogating laws rests with the National Congress. III. The power of enforcing the laws, and of preparing them for execution, rests with the Supreme Executive Power of the:Republic. IV. The power of applying the laws rests with the judges and tribunals established by law. CHAPTER II.- Of the Congress or National Legislature. ART. I The National Congress shall for the present be composed of 200 Deputies, chosen according to the hitherto observed forms they must be citizens of property, as well as distinguished for their talents and patriotism. II. The National Congress shall, in ordinary cases, be convoked

PARAGUAY. every 5 years, reckoning the same from the 15th of March of 1844. The convocation must be preceded by an interval of 30 days at least, and the sessions shall last for such length of time as the Congress itself may determine. HI. The Congress shall assemble and open its sessions in the capital of the Republic, and shall have the style and title of " Right Honourable Sirs, Representatives of the Nation ;" it shall nominate a President, a Secretary, and the other officials required for the despatch of business. IV. For the better conducting of its deliberations, the Congress shall appoint the committees it may deem necessary, and each committee shall nominate a President and Secretary for the time such committee lasts. V. The opinions of the Committees must be given in writing and be duly signed, without, however, any member thereof being thereby prevented from speaking on the subject. - VI. The National Congress shall, at a convenient opportunity, introduce a regulation for the internal management of its acts. . VII: It shall have a Record Office in which shall be kept the registers of its acts and other official documents, all of which shall be under the charge of the Secretary of the Congress. VIII. The appointment of the Committees, and the determining the number thereof, rests with the President of the Congress, until the necessary regulations on the subject shall be introduced. The Committees are bound to inform the President of the Congress, verbally, when they have concluded their labours, the results of which are to be forwarded to the said President under sealed cover. IX. The President of the Congress shall submit to the deliberation of the Congress. in the order which may be most convenient, the matters reported upon by the Committees. X. The President of the Congress is also empowered to watch over the internal order of the House of Representatives, and to see that due circumspection and dignity be observed in all its deliberations.
CHAPTER III	 the Attributes of the National Congress.

Aim I. It belongs to the National Congress to make the laws and ordinances of every description for regulating the interior administration of the Republic, as well as to modify, suspend, or abolish them. To elect the President of the Republic, administer, to him the oath required by law, and decree his being invested with the supreme power. III. It belongs to the National Congress to declare war, having previously heard the reasons adduced by the President of the

PARAGUAY.	

753

IV. To recommend the President of the nation to enter into negotiations for peace, when such a measure is deemed advisable. V. To fix the general expenses agreeably to the estimates presented by the President of the Republic. VI. To receive, examine, and pass the accounts of the expenditure of the public monies. VII. To fix the alloy, standard value, weight, and type of the coin. VIII. To establish tribunals of justice, and regulate the form of trials. IX. To create and abolish employments of every description. X. To regulate both home and foreign trade. XI. To mark out the territory of the Republic, and determine its limits. XII. To ratify the Treaties entered into by the President of the Republic in the eases allowed by the law of the Sovereign Congress of 26th November, 1842, Article XX.
CHAPTER IV.—Of the Permanent Executive Power. ART. I. The permanent National Government shall be administered by a single citizen having the title of "His Excellency the President of the Republic of Paraguay." II. No one can be elected President of the Republic who is not a citizen of the Republic of Paraguay, by the common natural law thereof : in addition to which he must be 45 years of age, of acknowledged talent, integrity, patriotism, and good moral conduct ; and possess a capital of 8,000 dollars. III. In order to enter upon the duties of President, he shall, in the presence of the National Congress, take the following oath : " I, such an one, do solemnly swear by our Lord God and these Holy Evangelists, that I will faithfully perform the office of, President of the Republic, that I will protect the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion, the sole one of the State, that I will preserve and defend the integrity and independence of the nation, and will do all in my power to promote the welfare of the Republic." IV. The President of the Republic shall continue in the office of the National Presidency for 10 years from the, day of his election. V. In case of the illness or absence of the President, or whilst a new election is in progress, in consequence of his death, resignation, or other cause, the Chief Judge of Appeals shall assume the supreme power thereof, and shall, in the presence of all the civil, military and ecclesiastical corporations, take the oath provided by the law, and which shall be administered to him by the President of the Republic himself, or in his default, by the Prelate of the Diocese. For the due execution of this act, without which the said Chief Judge cannot take upon himself 3C [1844-4.5.)	

754	

PARAGUAY.

the direction of the Republic, the Authorities shall be assembled in the Government Palace. VI. The President of the Republic shall receive for his services the allowance separately assigned him by the law, by which also shall be fixed the allowance to be received by the Vice-President in the cases specified in the Vth Article of this Chapter. VII. The Chief Judge of Appeal, charged with the Presidency ad interim, shall appoint a citizen of known competency and integrity to be his substitute for the time being in the Superior Tribunal : the said substitute to take the oath by law established, and to be remunerated for his services with the same salary as that of the Judge for whom he acts. VIII. In the cases of the illness or absence of the Provisional President, the latter shall appoint the Secretary, who will have to act with the Vice-President ad interim. IX. On the decease 'of the President of the Republic, the VicePresident ad interim shall immediately convoke the National Congress for the election of a Provisional President. Chapter V.—Of the Election of the President of the Republic.

	

I. The President of the Republic of Paraguay shall be chosen by the National Congress in permanent session. The election shall be effected by a majority of the nuncupative votes of the deputies ; and the requisite Supplementary Act shall be duly drawn up. II. The circumstance of signing the said Act shall not interfere with the accession of the legally elected President, nor with his assuming the supreme authority. III. Four votes more than the half shall constitute the majority.. IV. Should the number of votes for the President be equally divided, the election shall take place a second time, and should majority in this case either be obtained, the names of the citizens bet w een whom the votes are divided, Shall be inscribed on 2 slips of paper and put into a ballotting bag, and being drawn therefrom, m the presence of the National Congress, that citizen shall be declared President in whose favour chance shall have thus decided. • V. Immediately after the election of the President has been made, such election shall be proclaimed aloud by the Secretary of the
ART. Congress.. CHAPTER VI.—Honorary Marks of Distinction of the President of the

Republic.
ART. I. The President of the Republic shall wear the uniform of Captain-General, and underneath the uniform a tricolored ribbon froth right to left, from which shall be pendent over his breast a national emblem or jewel of honour, both being at the cost of the Treasury of the Republic.

PARAGUAY.	

755

II. The jewel of honour shall be a star of gold set in diamonds, in the centre of which may be read on one side, " Executive Power,' and on the other, " Republic of Paraguay." III. The President of the Republic shall have the attributes and prerogatives of Captain•General, and be entitled to form a guard of honour for the safety of his person. The guard shall not exceed the number of 75. IV. He shall have besides 2 or 3 aides-de-camp in waiting in the Palace, who shall perform their duties in turn ; as also a warden and such domestic servants as may be required, the salaries of the same to be paid by the National Treasury.
CHAPTER VII.—Of the Attributes of the President of the Republic. ART. I. The authority of the President of the Republic becomes extraordinary in the eases of invasion and internal commotion, and as often as is necessary for preserving the public order and tranquillity of the Republic. H. The President of the Nation is the head of the General Administration of the Republic. III. He promulgates the laws and decrees of the Congress, and' causes them to be executed, regulating such execution by special ordinances. IV. He convokes the National Congress at the period fixed by this law, or extraordinarily when circumstances so require. V. He opens the Sessions of the Congress, and must lay before it an official report of the political state of the Republic, and of the' ameliorations and reforms which he may consider as deserving its attention : finally he closes the sessions. VI. He issues, at the proper time, the orders necessary for the election of Deputies. VII. He is the Supreme Chief of the Naval and of the Land Forces, and is exclusively charged with the employment thereof during peace and war. He can command the army in person, or. name a General-in-Chief to command it in his stead. VIII. He provides for the safety' of the Republic at home and . abroad.IX. He proclaims war and peace, and adopts, on his own responsibility-, whatever measures are preparatory thereto. X. He makes Treaties of Peace and Alliance, due regard being bad to the principles laid down in the X Xth Article of the Law of the Sovereign Extraordinary Congress of 26th November, 1842. XI. He fixes the amount of the Regular and Militia Forces, of all arms. XII. He orders vessels of war to be built and equipped, and fixes the number of the same. 302

75G	
employes.

PARAGUAY.

XIII. He appoints and dismisses the civil, military and political XIV. He likewise names envoys, agents, and other diplomatic functionaries. XV. He can receive, according to the forms of etiquette, the • Ministers and Agents of foreign Nations, and hear their proposals without, however, concluding anything contrary to the provisions of the aforesaid XXth Article of the above-mentioned law. XVI. He exercises the general patronage as regards churches, benefices, and ecclesiastical persons, conformably to the laws. Tic appoints the bishops and the members of the Ecclesiastical Senate. XVII. He can celebrate Concordats with the Holy Apostolic See; grant or withhold his consent to the decrees of Councils, and of all other ecclesiastical Constitutions ; allow or refuse the Exequatur to Bulls or other Pontifical briefs, without which requisite the same shall not be carried into effect. XVIII. He is the exclusive judge of the causes set apart in the statute of the administration of justice. XIX. He promotes and encourages the establishments of primary education, and those of the higher branches of knowledge. XX. He can. remit or commute capital punishment in conformity with the dispositions of the LVIIIth Article of the Statutes of Justice. XXI. He can increase or diminish the salaries of public employes. XXII.He applies exclusively the tithe revenues for the benefit of churches, of the ministers of public worship, and other objects of this description, conformably to the special law which has been enacted on this subject. XXIII. He can grant retirements and pensions, remunerative gratuities, or other marks of favour, to those who may have distinguished themselves in the service of the Republic. XXIV. He can visit personally, once, or oftener,. during the periodfhsPncy,alrptofheiyRpublc. XXV. He can remove all impediments, and qualify the nativeborn sons of the Republic to acquire donations, legacies, and inheritances, all laws to the contrary being hereby revoked. XXVI. Open commercial ports, and raise villages to the rank of towns and cities, giving due information thereof- to the National Congress. XXVII. Form general or particular plans of public education, subsequently submitting the same to the approval of the National Representation. XXVIII. Assign privileges for a determinate time to the authors • or inventors of useful establishments, apprizing the National Congress of such grant of privileges.

PARAGUAY.	

757

XXIX. He can great amnesties, communicating his having done so to the National Congress. XXX. All the branches of public works, roads, post offices, couriers, establishments of primary and scientific education, defrayed by the funds of the nation ; all the objects and branches of finance and police are under the supreme inspection of, and receive their impulse from, the President of the Republic. CHAPTER VIII.—Of the Ministers, Secretaries of State.
ART. I. When the President of the Republic deems it expedient,

he can appoint one or more Ministers Secretaries of State, or incorporate, for a time, in one single office, the Departments of Government and of Foreign Affairs. II. The Minister Secretary of State can be removed from his employment at the discretion of the President of the Republic. III. The Minister or Ministers of State shall have no other compellation than that of " Usted," nor can they issue any order without the consent and approbation of the President of the Republic. IV. They shall receive a salary to be fixed by the President of the Republic. CHAPTER IX.—Of the Council of State.
ART. I. The Council of State in the Republic of Paraguay shall be either eventually or temporally composed of the Diocesan Prelate, 2 Judges of the Magistracy elected by the Executive Power, and 3 Citizens of competent ability, also nominated by the Supreme Government of the Republic. II. The Council of State shall appoint a President, ad interim, from its own body, and a Secretary, who may be chosen from without the Council, and must possess the qualifications necessary for such an office. III. The President of the Republic shall appoint the place where the Council of State will have to assemble. IV. The Council of State shall be heard and convoked by the Supreme Government on business of importance and on general measures of public administration, principally in the event of a foreign war, or of Treaties with the Envoys of neighbouring States" or of foreign Powers, or when it may be necessary to grant an amnesty, put a veto on the laws and decrees of the National Congress, or convoke the Congress extraordinarily. V. The Council of State shall deliver its opinions In writing, and signed. VI. It is bound to observe secrecy with respect to the matters which may be submitted to it by the Supreme Government, with that injunction.

758	

PARAGUAY,

VII. The President of the Republic shall administer to the Council 'of State the oath provided by law, preparatory to their entering upon their functions. VIII. The Council of State shall meet, upon the requisition of the President of the Republic. IX. The vacancies of the Members of the Council shall be filled up by "the nominations to be made by the President of the Republic. X. The President of the Nation, after being made acquainted with the opinions of the Council of State, may, if he considers them inexpedient, reject them, and adopt such resolutions as may appear to him advisable. XI. The Presidents of the Republic at the conclusion of their command, are natal Members of the Council of State, and are to attend at the meetings of the same, in addition to the members designated in Article I. XII. The Council of State shall have no higher compellation than that of" Gentlemen of the Council."
CHAPTER X.—General Ordinances. ART. I. The citizens of the Republic shall tender their recognition

of, and obedience to, the national President so soon as he is in possession of the supreme authority, and in such form as the President of the Republic may prescribe. All men are in such wise equal in the eye of the law, that whether punishment, precept, or protection, be its object, the said law must be one and the same for all, whether they be rich or poor. III. All the inhabitants of the Republic possess the right to have their complaints heard by the Supreme Government of the nation. IV. Every one is free to leave the territory of the Republic and to carry away with him, in produce, the value or equivalent of his acquired property, provided that the police regulations be duly observed, and that the interests of a third person be uninjured thereby. V. For entering the territory of the Republic, the orders previously established must be observed, it being at the option of the Supreme Government to increase or to curtail them as circumstances may require. VI. All military employments hitherto bestowed, and which may be granted in future, are employments upon commission alone. VII. Private establishments of primary education, and those of other sciences which may in future be established in the Republic, shall previously obtain leave from the Supreme Government, the preceptors or masters being required to present the plan of instruction, the subjects which they propose to teach, and the authors they intend to adopt, and to follow strictly the regulations which the Supreme National Government may give them.

PARAGUAY.	
	

759

VIII. In order to establish private printing-presses in the Republic, the permission of the Supreme Government must be first obtained, the owner or manager giving a security of 2,000 dollars by Which he pledges himself to comply with the regulations which the Government of the Republic may impose. IX. The inhabitants of the Republic, whatsoever their origin may be, shall, for all kinds of causes, recognize no other tribunals than those established by our own laws ; consequently the establishment of foreign tribunals under any form whatever is hereby prohibited. X. -The traffic of slaves or of Negroes, even with the title and under the pretext of colonists, is hereby prohibited. XI. The laws and decrees sanctioned by the Sovereign Congress of 25th November, 1842, are ratified. XII. This present law may be reformed or have additions made to it, as experience may require, but for this it will be necessary : 1. That the consent and approbation of the majority of the National Congress be obtained. 2. That the matters proposed to be reformed are fully proved to need amendment. 3. That moreover the Executive Power do express its opinion together with the reasons thereof, in order that the expediency or necessity of the reform, or of any material addition, may be determined upon. 4. The necessity of the reform being sanctioned, a general Congress shall be convoked, with special powers for confirming the reform . with all the due formalities. 5. The reform being confirmed, it shall be passed to the Executive Power either for publication, or in order that the latter may bring forward its objections against the measure. In the case of its being returned with objections, the votes of the majority of the Congress in its favour shall constitute its ultimate sanction. XIII and last Article. Any one who shall form attempts against, or shall afford the means of forming attempts against the independence of the Republic, or against the present fundamental law, shall be punished, even to the extent of death, according to the gravity of the offence. Given in the Hall of Sessions of the National Congress of the Republic of Paraguay on the 13th of March, 1844. JUAN MANUEL ALVAREZ, Vice-President of the National Congress. FERNANDO PATIN°, Secretary to the National Congress. Assumption, March 16, 1844. LOP EZ. Let this Law be published in the usual form. 	 BENITO MARTINEZ VARELA, Government Secretary ad interim.

