Provisional President of the Republic under the has, Peru, of Congress Peru, whereas, the Constituent protection of God, sanctioned the following Nation.
 

SECTION

I.-The 

of the powers established and exercises its sovereignty by means this Constitution. any compact which is II. No one of these powers can conclude or independence of the nation. opposed to the sovereignty, integrity, SECTION I.-Religion. the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion. professes III. The nation allow the public worship of any The State protects it, and does not
other.

is sovereign, free, and independent ART. I. The Peruvian Nation by

SECTION III.-National Guarantees. the title of sovereign, he who IV. No one can arrogate to himself should do so commits high treason. charters, and property in V. Hereditary privileges, personal Entails are prohibited, offices are not recognised in the Republic. form prescribed by the law. the in of disposed be can and all property functionaries can be None of the judicial, civil, and financial proved. dismissed, without legal cause judicially can only be alienated in V1. Property belonging to the nation by law and for the purposes the cases and in the form prescribed which it appoints. the Congress only. Should VII. Taxes can be imposed by they can only be imposed for personal contributions be established, a fixed time.


VIII. The law fixes the revenues and the expenses of the nation, and any amount whatsoever exacted or applied against the tenour thereof falls to the joint responsibility of him who orders the exaction or undue outlay, of him who executes the order, and of him who receives the money, on proof of the culpability of the latter. IX. The nation is not responsible for obligations contracted or compacts concluded by de facto Governments, although they rule in the capital of the Republic, unless such obligations and such compacts be approved by a National Congress. X. The acts of those who have usurped public functions, and the offices conferred without the requirements appointed by the Constitution and the laws are null. XI. Every one in the exercise of a public office shall be directly and immediately responsible for the acts which be performs in the exercise of his functions. The law will determine the manner of making this responsibility effective. The law officers will be responsible by public action if they do not enforce the fulfilment of the provisions of this article. XII. Every Peruvian is authorised to appeal to the Congress, to the Executive Power, or to any competent authority whatsoever, against infractions of the Constitution.
SECTION IV.-Individual Guarantees. XIII. No one is obliged to do that which is not ordered by the law, nor prevented from doing what is not prohibited by the law. XIV. No law has any retroactive effect. XV. Human life is inviolable; the law cannot impose the punishment of death. XVI. There are not nor can there be any slaves in the Republic. XVII. No one can be arrested without a written order from the competent judge or the authorities appointed for the preservation of public order, except inflagrante delieto; and in all cases the person arrested must be placed at the disposal of the proper tribunal within 24 hours. Those who execute such an order must give a copy of it if required to do so. XVIII. The houses of detention are places of security and not of punishment. All severity not necessary for the custody of the prisoners is prohibited. XIX. Nobody can be sent out of the Republic nor away from the place of his residence, unless by sentence legally obtained. XX. Every one can make use of the press to publish his writings, without previous censure, and without responsibility in matters of public interest.

In publications relating to personal matters, the authors and editors will be made responsible according to the law to be instituted by the jury for such cases. Every publication which attacks the private life of individuals must be signed by the author of it XXI. The secrecy of letters is inviolable; such as may have been abstracted shall have no legal effect. XXII. Every employment or profession not opposed to public morals, security, or health may be freely exercised. XXIII. The nation guarantees the existence and diffusion of gratuitous elementary instruction and the encouragement of public establishments for sciences, arts, charity, and benevolence. XXIV. Instruction, primary, middle-class, and superior, and the foundation of universities are completely free, but under the restrictions set forth in Art. 22, and under the conditions of capability and morality determined by law. Members of private universities will be admitted to those protected by the State; the only requirement being an examination as to competency in the faculty which they wish to join. Primary, middle-class, and superior instruction protected by the State, will be subject to the formalities prescribed by law. XXV. Property is inviolable, whether material or intellectual. No one can be deprived of his property, unless on account of public utility, legally proved, and an equitable previous indemnification. XXVI. Foreigners may acquire landed property within the Republic, in accordance with the laws: and in everything concerning such property they are subject to the obligations and enjoy the privileges of a Peruvian. XXVII. All citizens have the right to assemble peacefully, whether in public or in private. XXVIII. The right of petition is free, whether exercised individually or collectively. XXIX. The domicile is inviolable and must not to be entered without previously exhibiting a written order from a competent magistrate, or from the authorities charged with preserving public peace and order. Those who execute such an order are required to give a copy of it if requested. XXX. The laws protect and compel every one equally; special laws may be established if the nature of the objects require them, but not for the difference of persons only. XXXI. Recruiting is a crime which gives every one a right of action before the judges and the Congress against him who orders, and him who executes.

511 


 SECTION V.-Peruvians.

XXXII. There are Peruvians by birth and Peruvians by naturalisation. XXXIII. Peruvians by birth are: 1st. Those who are born within the territory of the Republic. 2nd. The sons of a Peruvian father or mother born in a foreign country, and whose names have been inscribed in the civic register by will of their parents during their minority, or by their own on their coming of age or having been emancipated. XXXIV. The rights of Peruvians by birth shall be enjoyed by: 1st. All foreigners who were in the country when the Independence was proclaimed and sworn, and who have since continued to reside therein. 2nd. All foreigners who were engaged in the war of the Independence, and also the conquerors in Abtao and in Callao, residing in the country. XXXV. In order that the foreigners comprised in the foregoing Article may enjoy the rights of Peruvians by birth, they will have to inscribe their names in the civic register of the province wherein they reside. Those who already enjoy these rights by virtue of pre-existing laws, or because they are in the service of the Republic are excepted from this provision. XXXVI. Peruvians by naturalisation are: Foreigners of the age of 21 residing in Peru, following some trade, calling, or profession, and who have inscribed their names in the civic register in the manner directed by law. XXXVII. Every Peruvian is required to serve the Republic with his person and his property in the manner and degree appointed by the laws.
SECTION VI.-Citizenship.

XXXVIII. All Peruvians of the age of 21, and those that are emancipated are citizens de facto of Peru. XXXIX. The popular suffrage is direct, and all defacto citizens enjoy this right. XL. Every citizen may fill any public office, provided he possesses the qualifications required by law. XLI. The right of citizenship is suspended: 1st. For incapability; 2nd. For having obtained or exercising citizenship in another Republican State; 3rd. For being on trial for bankruptcy; 4th. For being under criminal prosecution with warrant of arrest;

512 



5th. For being notoriously a vagrant, gambler, drunkard, or being divorced in consequence of his own guilt. XLII. The right of citizenship is forfeited; 1st. By judicial sentence to that effect; 2nd. For fraudulent bankruptcy judicially declared; 3rd. For having obtained and exercising the right of citizenship a in monarchical State; 4th. For accepting from a foreign Government any employment, title, or decoration without leave of the Congress; 5th. For traffic in slaves, wherever carried on. SECTION VII.- Form of Government. XLIII. The Government of Peru is Republican, Democratic, Representative, and founded on unity. XLIV. Public functions are exercised by those charged with legislative, executive, and judicial powers, and none of them can overstep the limits prescribed by this Constitution.
SEcTION VIII. Legislative Power.

XLV. The Legislative Power is exercised by the Congress in one Chamber only, and in the manner established by this Constitution. XLVI. The election of representatives to Congress will take place according to law. XLVII. In every province one actual representative and one substitute shall be elected, although the population may not amount to 15,000. When the number of inhabitants is greater, one representative shall be elected for every 25,000 inhabitants, and another for fractions exceeding 15,000. XLVIII. To be eligible as a representative, it is requisite to have been born in Peru, to be a de facto citizen and a native of the department, or to have resided two years in the province. XLIX. The following cannot be representatives: 1st. The President of the Republic. 2nd. The Ministers of State and the Prefects, if they have not relinquished their office one year before the election; nor the SubPrefects if they have not relinquished it 6 months before. 3rd. The members and law officers of the Supreme Court of Justice. 4th. Archbishops and bishops. 5th. All ecclesiastics with cure of souls. 6th. Ecclesiastical governors, capitulary vicars, vicars-general and all other members of ecclesiastical chapters, for the departments or provinces of their respective dioceses. 7th. The members and law officers of the superior courts, for the departments or provinces in which they exercise jurisdiction. 





8th. The Judges of First Instance and public attorneys for the provinces to which their judicial districts belong. 9th. The administrators of treasuries for the departments in which they exercise their functions. 10th. The administrators of custom-houses for the provinces wherein they perform their duties. 11th. The Commander-in-Chief of the Army. 12th. The commandants-general and officers in command of troops, in the departments where they are quartered at the time of the election. 13th. The military commanders in the provinces under their authority; and in general all military men for the provinces in which they are on duty at the time of the election. L. The ordinary Congress will assemble every year on the 28th of July, with or without previous decree of convocation; and the extraordinary Congress whenever it may be convoked by the Executive Power. LL. The duration of the ordinary Congress shall be for 90 natural days absolutely, and the extraordinary Congress shall terminate on the fulfilment of the purpose of its convocation; but in no case can it act for more than 45 natural days. LII. The opening of Congress cannot take place with less than two-thirds of the total number of representatives. LIII. The representatives are inviolable in the exercise of their functions. LIV. The representatives can neither be accused nor arrested during the sessions without previous authority from the Congress, excepting in cases offlagrante delicto, when they are at once to be placed at the disposal of the legislative body. LV. Neither can they be accused or detained, during one month before and one month after the sessions, without previous consent of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice; excepting the case of flagrante delicto, when they are to be placed at the disposal of the Supreme Court for trial according to law. LVI. The seat of a Representative becomes vacant de facto on the acceptance by him of any office to which the appointment depends in any way on the Executive Power. LVII. The Congress will be renewed every two years by one half, at the end of the ordinary session. LVIII. Representatives may be re-elected; and only in this case can their office be renounced. LIX. The following are attributions of the Congress: 1st. To pass, interpret, modify, and repeal the laws. 2nd. To open and close its sessions at the time appointed by the

3rd. To choose the place of its sessions and to determine whether or not there is to be an armed force, to what number, and at 'what distance. , 4th. To examine first of all any infractions of the Constitution, and to decide on the necessary means to make the offenders responsible. 5th. To impose taxes and to abolish or modify those in existence. 6th. To pass the estimates and to approve or condemn the yearly account of expenditure presented by the Executive Power. 7th. To authorise the Executive Power to negotiate loans, pledging the national exchequer, and appointing funds for the redemption. 8th. To acknowledge the national debt, and to appoint the manner of consolidating and redeeming it. 9th. To create or suppress public offices and to vote corresponding stipends. 10th. To determine the alloy, the weight, the type, and the denomination of the coin. 11th. To determine the weights and measures. 12th. To proclaim the election of President of the Republic made by the nation, and to elect him when he has not been elected according to law. 13th. To accept or not the resignation of the President of the Republic. 14th. To resolve any doubts occurring as to the incapacity of the President, mentioned in paragraph 2 of Article LXXX. 15th. To approve or reject the proposals made by the Executive for Commanders of the Army and Navy, from Major and Captain of corvette to General and Rear-Admiral inclusive, without in any case exceeding the number specified by the law. 16th. To give or refuse its consent for the entrance of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic. 17th. To resolve on the declaration of war, on previous report from the Executive Power, and to require him in due time to negotiate for peace. 18th. To approve or disapprove Treaties of Peace, Concordats, and other Conventions connected with foreign affairs. 19th. To make the necessary regulations for the exercise of the patronage. 20th. To see that the departmental Councils perform their duties; to correct their abuses, and to solve any doubts or questions that arise therein. 21st. To declare when the country is in danger, and to pass the necessary measures within constitutional limits to save it. 22nd. To decide at every ordinary session, and, if necessary, at 

the extraordinary ones, what amount of forces by land and by sea the State has to maintain, in accordance with Article CXVII. 23rd. To make the territorial division and demarcation. 24th. To grant rewards to towns, corporations, or persons, for important services rendered to the Republic. 25th. To examine after the end of every constitutional period, and, during the first ordinary session of the new period, the administrative acts of the Chief of the Executive Power, and to approve them, if they be in accordance with the Constitution and the laws. In the contrary case, to enforce the responsibility according to the law. 26th. To render effective according to law the responsibility of the Ministers of State, and of the members of the Supreme Court, for infractions of the Constitution, and for every transgression committed in the exercise of their functions. 27th. To organize its secretary's office to appoint its functionaries, to draw up its estimate, and to regulate its internal economy and police. 28th. To settle any contentions that may arise between the superior courts and the supreme court, and between the latter and the Executive Power. 29th. To grant amnesties; to stop pending political trials, and to set the prisoners at liberty. 30th. To receive the accusations brought against the President of the Republic for the offences specified in paragraphs 2, 3, and 4, of Article LXXIX, and to declare whether it is a case of vacation or not. In the first case, the delinquent is to be brought to trial before the competent judge, and the Presidency is to be entrusted to him who is indicated by the law.
SEcTION 9.-Formation and Promulqation of the Laws.

LX. The following have the right of initiative in the formation of the laws: 1. The Representatives of the nation; 2. The Executive; 3. The Supreme Court in judicial matters. LXI. Projects or resolutions of general interest must not be put to the vote until after the second discussion, which is to take place at least 3 days after the closing of the first. The regular course of the second discussion may be dispensed with in urgent cases by two-thirds of the deputies present. When a law has been approved by the Congress it is to be sent to the Executive, to be promulgated and executed. If the Executive should have observations to make he must present them to the Congress within the peremptory term of 10 days.

516 

LXII. A law reconsidered by the Congress with the observations of the Executive, if again approved, is sanctioned, and is to be sent for fulfilment; if not approved, it cannot be considered until the following session. LXiII. The Executive cannot make observations on the resolutions or laws passed by the Congress in the exercise of its attributes, Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, and 16, nor on those passing a vote of censure against the Ministers. LXIV. If the Executive should not order the promulgation and fulfilment of anx law, or should not make observations thereon within the term fixed in Article LXI, the promulgation is to be" made by the President of the Congress, who will order its insertion for the purpose of its fulfilment, in the official or any other journal. LXV. The sittings of Congress shall be public. They can only the be secret in the cases specified in the regulations, and with required. previous formalities thereby LXVI. The voting in everything relating to foreign affairs, or in any way concerning the national revenue, is to be nominal. LXVII. For interpreting, modifying, or abrogating laws, the same routine is to be observed as for their formation. LXVIII. The Congress in enacting the laws shall use the following form: "The Congress of the Republic of Peru." (Here the preamble.) "Has passed the following law." (Here the enactments.) to the Executive Power for him to communicated be it Let fulfilment." its for necessary is direct what LXIX. The Executive on promulgating and ordering the fulfilment of the laws, shall use this form: "The President of the Republic. Inasmuch as the Congress has passed the following law." (Here follows the law.) that it be printed, and that it have its due order I "Therefore, fulfilment." SECTIOIN X.-The Executive Power. LXX. The Chief of the Executive Power has the title of President of the Republic. LXXI. In order to be President of the Republic, it is requisite: 1. To have been born in Peru; 2. To be a defacto citizen; 3. To be at least 35 years of age, and to have been domiciled for 10 years in the Republic.

LXXII. The President shall be elected by the people, in the form prescribed by the law. LXXIII. The Congress is to open the electoral documents, to verify them, and to adjust the votes, and to proclaim as President the person who shall have obtained the absolute majority. LXXIV. If the said majority should not result from the scrutiny, the Congress will elect from the two who have obtained the greatest number of votes. If two or more should have an equal number of votes, the Congress is to choose from them. If in the voting by the Congress, according to this Article, there should be an equality of votes, the election is to be decided by lot. LXXV. When the President is elected by the Congress the election must be indispensably concluded in one sitting only. LXXVI. The President shall continue in his office for 5 years, and he cannot be re-elected, until after an equal period. LXXVII. The President of the Republic on concluding his tenure of office, shall give a detailed account of his administrative acts to the Congress, for the purposes of the attribution 29, Article LIX. LXXVIII. The salary of the President cannot be increased during his term of office. LXXIX. The Presidential chair of the Republic becomes vacant de facto : 1. By death of the President; 2. By his concluding any compact against the national independence and integrity ; 3. By an attempt against the form of Government; 4. For preventing the assembling of the Congress, suspending its sittings, or dissolving it. LXXX. It is vacant by law: 1. On the acceptance of his resignation; 2. Through moral or physical incapacity; 3. When its period has expired; 4. By judicial sentence that declares him guilty of the offence which caused his suspension, in accordance with Article LXXIX, paragraphs 2, 3, and 4. LXXXI. The exercise of the Presidency is suspended: 1. When the President commands the public force in person; 2. By temporary illness. LXXXII. The President of the Republic cannot be accused during the period of his office, except in the cases to which paragraphs 2, 3, and 4, of Article LXXIX refer. LXXXIII. In cases of vacancy as specified in Article LXXIX, paragraph 1, and Article LXXX, paragraphs 1 and 2, the President of the Council of Ministers will take charge of the PresidencY, of

518 




the Republic, and he shall within three days issue the necessary orders for the election of President, and convoke the Congress for the purposes of Article LXXIII, and following ones. In the cases specified in Article LXXXI, the Presidency of the Republic shall also be exercised by the President of the Council of Ministers, whilst the impediment lasts. of LXXXIV. The Ministers of State and the General-in-Chief Republic the of Presidency the for candidates be cannot the Army until one year after having renounced their posts. LXXXV. The following are attritutions of the President of the Republic : 1. To preserve the internal order and the external security of the Republic without contravention of the laws ; 2. To convoke an ordinary Congress without prejudice to the one provision in the first part of Article L, and an extraordinary when necessity requires it ; 3. To attend the opening of Congress, presenting a Message on the state of the Republic, and on the reforms and improvements which he considers expedient; 4. To take part in the formation of the laws in accordance with this Constitution; 5. To promulgate and cause the execution of the laws and resolutions of the Congress, and to issue decrees, orders, regulations and instructions for their better fulfilment ; 6. To give the necessary orders for the collection and application of the public revenues in accordance with the law ; 7. To communicate with the judges and tribunals for the prompt administration of justice; 8. To cause the execution of the sentences passed by the tribunals and courts; 9. To organize the army and navy; to distribute and dispose them for the service of the Republic ; 10. To dispose of the national guard in their respective department, without the power of removing them from thence, except in case of sedition in the adjoining ones or in case of a foreign war; 11. To direct diplomatic negotiations and to conclude Treaties, which have to be submitted to Congress for approval, without which they will possess no validity whatsoever; 12. To receive foreign Ministers and to admit Consuls; 13. To appoint and dismiss Ministers of State and Diplomatic Agents; 14. To decree licenses and pensions according to the laws; 15. To exercise the ecclesiastical patronage in accordance with the laws and existing practices 16. To present as archbishops and bishops, with the approval of


the Congress, those that have been legally elected ; any presentation devolving on a person not previously elected being null and void; 17. To present to the dignities and canonries of the cathedrals, the livings and other ecclesiastical benefices, in accordance with the laws and existing practices; 18. To conclude Concordats with the Apostolic See, according to the instructions given b& Congress; 19. To grant or refuse the pass to coficiliar decrees, pontifical bulls, briefs, and rescripts with the assent of Congress, learning previously from the Supreme Court of Justice whether they relate to litigious matters ; 20. To fill up vacancies in those offices, to which the appointment belongs to him according to the Constitution and special laws. LXXXVI. The President cannot leave the territory of the Republic during the period of his authority without permission of the Congress, nor at the expiration of the said period whilst he may be subjected to the trial prescribed in Article LXXVII. LXXXVII. The President cannot command the Army in person without permission of the Congress; and, in case of his commanding it, he shall only have the power of Commander-in Chief, being subject to the laws and military ordinances, and responsible in accordance therewith. LXXXVIII. The President cannot carry on the business of any of the departments of public administration without the official concurrence of responsible Ministers; neither can he carry on the business of any department with a Minister against whom Congress has passed a vote of censure.
SECTION XI.-The Ministers of the State. LXXXIX. The dispatch of the business of the public administration belongs to the Ministers of State, whose number and the branches which belong to each will be appointed by a law. XC. To be a Minister of State it is requisite to have been born in Peru, to have resided 10 years in the Republic, and to be a de facto citizen. XCL The orders and decrees of the President are to be signed by the Ministers of their respective departments, without which requisite they are not to be obeyed. XCII The Ministers of State assembled will form the Council of Ministers, whose organization and functions will be specified by a law. XCIII. Each Minister is to present to the ordinary Congress, at the time of its installation, a memoir exhibiting the state. of the different branches of his department, and to make reports whenever required.




DZI

estimates furnish the general account of the previous year, and the for the year following. same The non-fulfilment of this provision will de facto have the effect as the vote of censure referred to in Article LXXXIII. XCV. The Ministers may present to Congress at any time also take such projects of law as they consider expedient, and may They voting. the to previous part in the debates, but must retire and Congress, by on called if discussions must likewise attend the questions the answer must they case former the both in this and in put to them. XCVI. The Ministers are jointly responsible for the resolutions adopted in Council, unless they withhold their votes, and individually responsible for the Acts peculiar to their department.

XCIV. The Finance Minister, besides the memoir, must also

he Attorney-General. Attorney-General, as administrative an be to XCVII. There is interests. fiscal of defender and Government, adviser of the Government. the by appointed be to is Attorney-General The
SECTION XII.SECTION XIII.-Internal System of the Republic.

7

XCVIII. The Republic is divided into departments, the departments into provinces, and the latter into districts. XCIX. The division of the departments, provinces, and districts, and the demarcation lines of their respective limits, will be the subject of a law. C. For the execution of the laws, fulfilment of judicial sentences, deand maintenance of public order, there will be prefects in the districts, the in governors provinces, the in partments, sub-prefects and deputy-governors wherever necessary. the CI. The prefects will be under the immediate authority of and prefects, the Executive Power, the sub-prefects under that of the governors under that of the sub-prefects. the CII. The prefects and sub-prefects will be appointed by proposed 3, of list a from Government, the governors by the prefects by the sub-prefects, and the deputy-governors by the sub-prefects, from a list of 3, proposed to them by the governors. CIII. The Executive Power can remove the prefects and subprefects according to law. of CIV. The attribution of these functionaries and the duration law. a by their tenure of office will be determined CV. The functionaries entrusted with the police of security and who public order depend immediately on the Executive Power, law. the with accordance in them will appoint or remove SECTION XIV.-Departmental Councils. capital of each department there is to be a council 
composed of deputies elected in the manner prescribed by law, to promote the interests of the department generally and those of the provinces in particular, and which must in no case interfere with political matters. CVII. To be elegible as a deputy to the Departmental Council, de facto citizenship is requisite, and to have resided in the depart. ment at least 3 years. CVIII. Public functionaries in receipt of salaries from the State cannot be members of this Council. CIX. It is the business of the councils to verify the elections of their members, and to resolve any doubts that may be raised in connection therewith. CX. At the time appointed by law, the Prefect shall open the sittings of the Council, informing the same in writing, of the requirements of the department. Should the Prefect fail to do so, the sittings are to be opened by the Council itself. CXI. The Departmental Councils are to meet annually, for the exercise of the faculties given to them by the law; their sessions shall be public, and continue for the time appointed by the same law. The order of the sittings is to be subject to their own regulation. CXII. The law will determine what funds are at the disposal of the Councils, for the fulfilment of their functions. CXIII. Resolutions of the Councils in opposition to the express laws will be null and void. CXIV. The Councils are to be renewed by one-half every two years, on the first occasion by lot.
SECTION XV.- Municipalities. CXV. There shall be municipalities in the capitals of the provinces, and even in towns not bearing this distinction; and municipal agencies in the districts. A law will set forth their functions, responsibility, qualifications of their members, and the mode of their election.
SECTION

CXVI. The object of the public force is to guarantee the nation's interests from without, and compliance with the laws and order within. Military obedience shall be subordinate to the Constitution and the laws. CXVII. The public force is composed of the National Guards, of the*Army and of the Navy, organised as appointed by law. The public force and the number of generals, chiefs, and officers will be specified by a law. The number of the public force on a peace footing not to exceed 3,000 men for the army, and 3,000 for police purposes. CXVIII. The National Guards shall be organized as determined by law.

XVI. Public Armament.

522 




523

CXIX. There are neither to be general, territorial, nor military commanders during time of peace. CXX. The public force can be neither augmented nor renewed, except in conformity with the law. SECTION XVII.-Of the Judicial -Power. CXXI. Justice will be administered by the tribunals and courts. CXXII. In the capital of the Republic there shall be the Supreme Court of Justice, in those of the departments, at the option of the Congress, Superior Courts, in those of the provinces Courts of First Instance, and police courts in all towns. The number of courts of first instance and of police courts to be fixed by a law. CXXIII. The members of the Supreme Court will be appointed by the Congress. For this purpose the Supreme Court will send to the Congress, in case of a vacancy, a list of all magistrates of 15 years' service, and of all advocates of 20 years' practice. The members of the superior courts shall be appointed by the Congress from two lists of three persons proposed by the Supreme Court, one of magistrates of 10 years' service, and the other of advocates of 10 years' practice. The judges of the law courts will be appointed by the Supreme Court on the proposal of the respective Superior Court. Justices of peace will be appointed by the respective superior court, from a list of three proposed by the judge of First Instance. . The Representatives cannot be proposed or elected for any judicial office. CXXIV. In the Supreme Court there is to be one attorneygeneral, in the Superior Courts the number specified by law, and fiscal agents in the capitals of departments and places determined by law. The Attorneys-General are to be appointed in the same manner as the members, and the fiscal agents in the same manner as the judges. CXXV. Publicity is essential in the trials; the tribunals may debate in secret, but the voting must be public. The reason is to be given in all sentences, stating the laws and grounds on which they are based. CXXVI. Every judgment by commission is prohibited. CXXVII. No power or authority can remove to a superior court, trials still pending before any other power or authority, nor advance them, nor cause law-suits already concluded to be revived. CXXVIII. Popular action against magistrates is justified by: 1st. Prevarication. 2nd. Bribery. 3rd. Abbreviation of judicial forms. 4th. Illegal proceedings against individual guarantees.


CXXIX. To pass sentence on appeals of nullity in the Supreme Court, there must be 5 concurrent votes. For judgment in private causes in the Supreme Court 3 votes are required in the first instance, and 5 in the second. CXXX. The law will determine the organisation of the legal administrative tribunals, and what relates to the appointment of their members. SECTION XVIII.-eform of the Constitution. CXXXI. In order to amend one or more of the Articles of the Constitution, it is requisite that the project be approved in 3 distinct legislative sessions, with previous discussion in each, like any project of law. SECTION XIX.-Transitor, Dispositions. 1st. The renewal of the ordinary Congress in the second legislature will be effected by drawing lots. 2nd. The special courts and tribunals and likewise their peculiar codes, shall continue to exist until the proposed reforms are legally effected. 3rd. This Constitution is to rule in the Republic from the day of its promulgation. 4th. The promulgation of this Constitution and the proclamation of the President of the Republic will take place on the 31st instant, the Congress continuing its labours as constituent Congress for the term of 75 days without prorogation. Given in the Hall of Sessions, in Lima, on the 29th day of August, 1867. [Here follow the signatures of the Deputies.] Wherefore, I order that it be fulfilled, promulgated and published. Government House, Lima, August 29, 1867. MARIANO J. PRADO. PEDRO PAZ-SOLDAN, Minister of Finance and Commerce. MARIA NO P!O CORNEJO, Minister of War and Marine. FELII'E OsoRio, Ministey of ,Justice, Chargedwith the -Departmentof Foreign A/fairs. PEDRO J. SAAVEDRA, Minister of the Interior, Police, and Public Works.

