CHAPTER

I.-Of the Nation.

ART. I. The Peruvian nation is the political association of all

the Peruvians. II. The nation is free and independent, and cannot enter into any compact which is opposed to its independence or integrity, or which in any way affects its sovereignty. III. The sovereignty resides in the nation and the exercise thereof is intrusted to the functionaries established by this Constitution.
CHAPTER

II.-Of the Religion.

IV. The nation professes the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman religion; the State protects it by every means conformable to the spirit of the Gospel, nor does it allow the public exercise of any other.
CHAPTER

III.-National Guarantees.

V. No one can arrogate the title of Sovereign; whoever should so do would be guilty of treason. VI. No hereditary privileges, no personal charters, no employments considered as property (empleos in propiedad) are recognised. Neither are entails allowed, and all property is alienable in the form determined by the laws.


By this Article the jurisdiction over ecclesiastical matters, which belongs to the tribunals specified by the canonical laws, is not diminished; nor is the detention of, nor the infliction of corporal punishment upon, ecclesiastical persons, unless in conformity with the canons, authorized thereby. VII. National property can only be alienated for the objects and in the cases and form specified by the law. VIII. No taxes can be imposed, except by virtue of a law, for the public service, and in proportion to the means of the contributor. Direct taxes can be imposed for one year only. IX. The law fixes the receipts and expenditure of the nation; and every amount exacted or expended in violation of its express tenor shall be so done at the joint responsibility of him who orders it, of him who executes it, and of him who receives it, unless the latter prove his innocence. X. Any law whatsoever which is opposed by the Constitution is null and of no effect. The acts also of those who usurp public functions are null, as likewise the employments conferred upon persons not possessing the qualifications prescribed by the Constitution and the laws. XI. Every public employ6 discharged from his office on any charge shall be subjected to examination; and, so long as his innocence remains unproved can neither exercise the same employment nor any other. The fiscals are liable to a State prosecution if they do not insist upon the fulfilment of this provision. XII. Public functionaries are responsible at all times, conformably to the laws. XIII. No one can exercise public functions nor possess any charge or benefice unless he swear to fulfil the Constitution. XIV. Every Peruvian can protest before the Congress, the Executive Power, or any other competent authority, against infractions of the Constitution.
CHAPTER

IV.-Individual Guarantees.

XV. No obligations are recognised except such as are imposed by the laws ; and no law has a retroactive effect. XVI. Human life is inviolable; the law cannot impose the punishment of death. XVII. No one is a slave in the Republic. XVIII. No one can be arrested without the written warrant of a competent judge, or of the authority intrusted with the preservation of public order, except when taken flagrante delicto ; but in every case the party, when taken, must be placed at the disposal of the competent judge within 24 hours.



XIX. No one shall be expatriated or banished without a sentence pronounced in consequence of a legal verdict. XX. All persons may employ or make use of the press without previous censorship, subject to the responsibility provided by the law. XXI. The secrecy of letters is inviolable; such as have been abstracted can be productive of no legal effect. XXII. All labour which is not opposed to the public morals, security, or health, is free. XXIII. The nation guarantees primary gratuitous instruction, as well as all public establishments of the arts and sciences, piety and benevolence. XXIV. All those who can produce certificates of ability and morality prescribed by the laws may freely exercise teaching, and direct educational establishments under the inspection of the authorities. XXV. Property is inviolable, nor can any one be deprived of what belongs to him, except on account of public utility, legally proved, and unless a duly appraised compensation be previously given. XXVI. Every foreigner may acquire, conformably to the laws, landed property in the Republic, he being, in all that concerns the said property, subject to the obligations and in the enjoyment of all the rights of a Peruvian. XXVII. The law secures to the inventors or introducers of useful inventions the exclusive proprietorship of them, or a compensation for the value of them, should they agree to publish them. XXVIII. All citizens possess the right of meeting together peaceably, whether in public or in private, provided public order be not compromised. XXIX. All may exercise the right of petitioning, whether individually or collectively. XXX. Private dwellings are inviolable; nor can they be entered without the previous production of a written warrant of a judge, or of the authority to whom is intrusted the preservation of public order; a copy of the said warrant may be required. XXXI. The laws protect and constrain all equally; special laws may be established because they are required by the nature of the objects, not alone by the difference of persons.
CHAPTER

V.-Of the Peruvians.

XXXII. There are Peruvians by birth and by naturalization. XXXIII. Peruvians by birth are: 1. Those who are born within the territory of the Republic. 2. The children of Peruvian father or mother who are born in a


foreign country, whose names are inscribed in the civic register, by the will of their parents, while they themselves are minors, or by their own, as soon as they attain the age of 21 years. XXXIV. Peruvians by naturalization are adult foreigners of 21 years of age, who exercise some profession or trade, and inscribe their names in the civic register, in the form which the law prescribes. XXXV. Every Peruvian is obliged to serve the Republic both with his person and property in the manner and in the proportion determined by the laws.
CHAPTER VI.-Of Citizenship. XXXVI. Citizens, or those who find themselves in the exercise of any political rights, are male adult Peruvians of 21 years of age, and married men as well although they may not have attained that age. XXXVII. Popular suffrage is direct; it is exercised by citizens who can read and write, or are masters of a manufactory, or have landed estate, or have retired, conformably to the law, after having served in the army or navy. XXXVIII. All citizens may aspire to public employments, provided they possess the special qualifications required by the law for each office. XXXIX. The exercise of citizenship is suspended: 1. By incapacity; 2. By the stigma of fraudulent bankruptcy; 3. By having been prosecuted criminally, and with committal to prison; 4. By the party being a notorious vagrant, gambler, drunkard, or by having been divorced by his own fault. XL. The right of citizenship is lost: 1. By a sentence imposing a punishment conformably to law; 2. By fraudulent bankruptcy, judicially so declared; 3. By obtaining or exercising the citizenship of another State; 4. By receiving any title of nobility or monarchical decoration; 5. By the monastic profession, so long as freedom from the cloister is not obtained; 6. By traffic in slaves, even with foreign countries. CHAPTER VII.-Of the Form of Government. XLI. The Government of the Republic is a democratic representative one, based upon unity. XLII. The persons charged with the legislative, executive and judicial powers, exercise the public functions without any of such parties being able to transgress the limits prescribed by this Constitution.



CHAPTER VIII.-Of the Legislative Power. XLIII. The legislative power is exercised by the representatives of the nation assembled in Congress composed of two Chambers, one of Senators and the other of Deputies. XLIV. The representatives of the people are elected, direct by the citizens in the exercise of their rights and in the form prescribed by the law. XLV. For every 25,000 inhabitants, or for a fraction which exceeds 15,000, and for every province although it has less than 15,000 inhabitants there shall be one representative and one substitute elected. XLVI. The requisites for a representative are: to be a Peruvian by birth, citizen in exercise (of rights) to be 28 years of age, to have resided 5 years in the Republic, and to have an income of 500 dollars, or to be the professor of some science. XLVII. Those incapable of being representatives are: 1. The functionaries of the executive power, unless they have been out of office for 2 months before the elections; 2. The archbishops and bishops; 3. The ecclesiastics who perform the duties of a cure of souls; 4. The voting members (vocales) of the Cortes in the departments where they exercise jurisdiction; 5. The judges in their judicial districts; 6. The military commanders and the chiefs with military force in the provinces where they are cantoned. XLVIII. The Congress shall ordinarily assemble every year on the 28th of July, and extraordinarily when convoked by the executive power. The duration of the ordinary sessions shall not exceed 100 absolute days; that of the extraordinary one may be less, the object for which it was convoked being accomplished. XLIX. The opening of the Congress cannot take place unless two-thirds of the total number of representatives are present. L. The representatives are inviolable in the exercise of their functions. LI The representatives can neither be arrested nor accused during the sessions without the previous authorization of the Congress. It is only in the case of flagrante delicto that they can be arrested, and being so, they must be placed immediately at the disposal of the Congress. LII. The situation of representative prevents the party filling it from accepting, while it lasts, any employment, office or benefice the nomination or presentation of which exclusively depends upon the Chief of the Executive Power. LIII. The Congress shall be annually renewed by one-third part of its number. The representatives may be re-elected and it is
only in this case that they can give up the duty entrusted to them. LIV. The Congress shall examine into the violations of the Constitution, in preference to all other objects, and it shall provide what is necessary for rendering effective the responsibility of the violators thereof. LV. The powers of the Congress are: 1. To give, interpret, modify and abrogate the laws: 2. To open and close its sessions at the time appointed by law; 3. To fix the place of its sittings, and determine if there should or should not be an armed force, in what number, and at what distance ; 4. To impose taxes for defraying the public expenses, to remit those already established, to sanction the estimates, and receive accounts annually from the Executive Power; 5. To open loans on the security of the national credit and provide funds for covering them; 6. To recognise the national debt, and determine the means for consolidating and extinguishing it; 7. To create or abolish public employments, and assign them the proper salary; 8. To fix the weight, alloy and denomination of the coin, as well as weights and measures; 9. To proclaim the election of the President by the nation, or, when he has not been elected according to law, to cause a new election ; 10. To accept or not, the resignation of the party charged with the executive power; 11. To clear up the doubts which may occur as to the incapacity of the President, deferred to in No. 2 of Art. 83 and to declare if a new election should or should not be had; 12. To approve or disapprove the proposed appointments made by the executive, of military and naval officers, from a major and a captain of a corvette, to a general and admiral inclusive; without exceeding in any case, the number fixed by the law; 13. To give or refuse its consent for the introduction of foreign troops into the territory of the Republic, and for the riding of naval squadrons in its ports; 14. To decree war, with the previous concurrence of the Executive Power, and, when necessary, to require the latter to enter into negotiations for peace; 15. To approve or disapprove the Treaties of peace, concordats, and other conventions resulting from relations with foreign countries;



16. To propose the necessary arrangements for the exercise of the right of ecclesiastical patronage; 17. To rehabilitate those who have forfeited citizenship; 18. To grant amnesties and pardons ; 19. To see that the departmental juntas fulfil their duties; to correct their abuses, and settle the doubts and questions which may arise therein; 20. To declare when the Republic is in danger, and to dictate, within the limits of the Constitution, the proper measures for saving it; 21. To declare, in each ordinary legislature, when convenient, the number of land and sea forces which the State has to maintain ; 22. To establish the territorial demarcation; 23. To grant honourable rewards to the towns, corporations, or persons that have performed eminent public services.
CHAPTER

IX.-Legislative Chambers.

LVI. Upon the Congress being installed, there shall be taken, by lot, one-half the number of the representatives, in order to form the Chamber of Senators, those who remain shall form the Chamber of Deputies. LVII. In each Chamber, Bills (proyeetos de ley) shall be introduced, discussed and voted upon, in conformity with the internal regulations of each Chamber. LVIII. Each Chamber has the right of appointing its Secretary, naming its employees, drawing up its estimates and regulating its management and police. LIX. The Legislative Chambers shall unite in Conference: 1. For exercising the powers 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 18, and 20. 2. For discussing and voting in common, upon the matter respecting which there has been a disagreement, should this step be required by either of the Chambers. LX. The Presidency of the Congress shall alternate between the Presidents of both Chambers, according as is determined by their internal regulations. LXI. It belongs to the Chamber of Deputies to impeach before the Senate the President of the Republic, during the period of his administration, for direct violations of the Constitution; and the members of both Chambers, the Ministers of State, and the voting members of the Supreme Court, for similar infractions, and for every crime committed in the exercise of their functions, and for which afflictive corporal punishment has been assigned. LXII. It belongs to the Chamber of the Senate to declare if there be or not sufficient grounds for the accusations preferred by




the other Chamber, the accused being, in the first case, suspended from exercising his employment, and subject to be tried according to law. X.-Of the Formation and Promulgation of the Laws. LXIII. The initiatives of law are: 1. The Bills of the Representatives. 2. Those of the Executive Power. 8. Those of the Supreme Court of Justice. LXIV. A Bill which has been approved of in either of the Chambers shall be passed to the other one, for being there discussed, and put to the vote. The additions made to it by the revising Chamber shall be subjected to the same process as the Bill itself. LXV. Upon the approval of a law by the Congress it shall be sent to the Executive, in order to its being carried into execution; and should the Executive have observations to make upon it, such observations must be communicated to the Congress within the space of 10 clear days. LXVI. If the law, together with the observations of the Executive, having been reconsidered in both Chambers, should be approved by them notwithstanding such observations, it shall be sanctioned and ordered to be carried into execution, but should it not be so approved, it cannot be again brought in until the next session of the Legislature. LXVII. Should the Executive not order the Bill to be carried into execution, nor make any observations within the appointed time, the law shall be considered as sanctioned, and shall be promulgated by the Executive, and failing him, by the President of the Congress. LXVIII. The sittings of the Congress, as well as those of the Chambers, shall be public. They can only be secret in the cases and under the conditions fixed by the rules of the Chambers. LXIX. The voting upon any question directly affecting the national revenues shall be by name. LXX. For the interpreting, modifying, or abrogating laws, the. same requirements are necessary as for their creation. LXXI. In drawing up the laws, Congress shall use the following formula: "The Congress of the Peruvian Republic has enacted the following law [here the text], let the same be communicated to the Executive Power, in order that the necessary means for its fulfilment be taken." LXXI. The Executive shall promulgate the law under this formula: "The President of the Republic-Inasmuch-The Congress has enacted the following law [here the text]. Therefore I
CHAPTER



order that it be printed, published, and circulated, and that it be duly fulfilled and executed." Chapter XI.-Executive Power. LXXIII. The head of the Executive Power is a citizen under the denomination of President of the Republic. LXXIV. The requisite qualifications for a President are: to be a Peruvian by birth, and 30 years of age, and to have resided 10 years in the Republic. LXXV. The President shall be elected by the people in the way prescribed by the law. LXXVI. The Congress shall cause the opening of the electoral proceedings, shall verify the qualifications and examine the scrutiny. LXXVII. He who shall have obtained an absolute majority of suffrages shall be President. Should he not have an absolute majority, then the Congress shall elect between the two who have obtained the greater number of votes; and if two or more have an equal number of votes, the Congress shall make its choice from among all of them. LXXVIII. If a tie should be the result of the voting made by the Congress in the above cases the election shall be decided by lot. LXXIX. The election of President must, in these cases, be concluded within one sole session. LXXX. The President shall remain in office four years, and cannot be re-elected President, nor elected Vice-President, until after the expiration of an equal period of time. LXXXI. During the period of the President of the Republic, his responsibility can only be rendered effective in the cases in which, conformably to this Constitution, the Presidentship is actually vacant. -In the other cases the President's period of office being ended, the responsibility spoken of in Articles XI and XII shall be enforced. LXXXII. The salary of the President cannot be increased during his term of office. LXXXIII. The Presidency of the Republic becomes actually vacant: 1.By death; 2. By concluding any compact adverse to the national independence or integrity; 3. By conspiring against the form of Government; 4. By preventing the assembling of the Congress, suspending its sessions, or dissolving it. The office becomes legally vacant: 1. By acceptance of the President's resignation; 2. By moral or physical incapacity;

3. By legal deprivation; 4. By termination of the official period. LXXXIV. There shall be a Vice-President of the Republic elected at the same time, with the same qualifications, and for the same period as the President; and whose duty is to supply his place in the cases designated in Articles LXXXIII and LXXXVIII. LXXXV. In the cases designated in Article LXXXIII, excepting the last one, the Vice-President shall conclude the period commenced; in Article LXXXVIII he shall only supply the temporary absence of the President. LXXXVI. In case of failure, at the same time, of the President and the Vice-President the Council of Ministers shall assume the Presidency, and shall exercise that office, until the person called by the law shall present himself; in case of a vacancy the necessary orders for the election of the President and Vice-President shall be issued within the first three days, and the Congress shall be convoked for the objects of Article LXXVI and of those following. LXXXVII. The Vice-President of the Republic, and the Ministers of State, cannot become candidates in the elections which are in progress for the Presidentship of the Republic, while they are in the exercise of the supreme authority. LXXXVIII. The exercise of the Presidentship is suspended by the President's commanding the public armed force in person, and by temporary illness. LXXXIX. The powers of the President of the Republic are: 1. To preserve good order within, and security without, the Republic, no laws being compromised thereby; 2. To convoke the ordinary Congress at the time specified by the law, and the extraordinary one when there is an acknowledged necessity for so doing; 3. To concur in the opening of the Congress, whether ordinary or extraordinary, laying before it a message upon the state of the Republic, and upon the improvements or reforms which may be considered expedient; 4. To take part in the formation of the laws, conformably to this Constitution; 5. To promulgate and cause to be executed, the laws, decrees, ordinances, and other provisions of the Congress; and give decrees, orders, regulations or instructions for its better accomplishment; 6. To give the necessary orders for the collection or application of the public revenues, according to the law; 7. To acquire from the judges and tribunals the prompt and impartial administration of justice; 8. To cause the sentences of the tribunals and courts of justice to be executed;


9. To organize, distribute, and employ the land and sea forces for the service of the Republic; 10. To employ the national guard in its respective provinces, without being able to remove it therefrom, except in the case of sedition in the adjoining ones, or in that of a foreign war; 11. To direct diplomatic negotiations and conclude Treaties of Peace, Friendship, Alliance, Trade, and whatsoever others, inserting in the same, the express stipulation that they shall be submitted to the Congress for the objects of the 15th power, Article LV of Chapter VIII; 12. To receive foreign Ministers and admit Consuls; 13. To appoint and remove the Ministers of State and Diplomatic Agents; 14. To decree leave of absence and pensions, conformably to the laws ; 15. To exercise church patronage in conformity with the laws and existing usages; 16. To present, with the approbation of the Congress, for archbishop and bishop, the persons who have been elected according to the law; 17. To present for the dignities and canonries of cathedrals, for the cures of parishes, and other ecclesiastical benefices, conformably to the laws and existing usages; 18. To conclude Concordats with the Apostolic See, regulating its proceedings by the instructions given by the Congress; 19. To allow or refuse, with consent of the Congress, the introduction of the decrees of councils, pontifical bulls, briefs, and pontifical rescripts. Should the objects of such documents involve questions of law, the opinion of the Supreme Court of Justice must previously be taken; 20. To fill up vacant employments, the nomination to which has been entrusted to him by the Constitution and by special laws. XC. His restrictions are: 1. He cannot quit the territory of the Republic without permission of the Congress, neither during the period of his official command, after it is ended, nor whilst the inquiry into his official conduct is going on; 2. He cannot command in person the armed force except with permission of the Congress; and in case of his commanding it, he shall only possess the powers of General-in-chief, subject to the law, and responsible to the same.
CHAPTER

XII.-Ministers of State.

XCI. The business of the public administration shall be



despatched by the Ministers of State, and their number, as well as the branches, assigned to each, shall be declared by a law. XCII. The orders and decrees of the President are to be signed by each Minister in his respective department, without which requisite they must not be obeyed. XCIII. There shall be a Council of Ministers, whose organization and functions shall be detailed by the laws. XCIV. The Ministers shall present to every Congress, at the time of its being installed, a report upon the state of their respective branches, and at any time whatsoever, the Bills which they deem expedient and the information required of them. XCV. The Minister of Finance shall, moreover, present to the ordinary Congress, at the time of its installation, the account of the preceding year and the outline of the estimates of the following one. XCVI. The Ministers may be present at the debates of the Congress, and at those of either of the Chambers, but they must, retire before the votes are taken. XCVII. The Ministers are responsible jointly and collectively for the resolutions dictated in Council, unless they enter their protest; and, individually, for the peculiar acts in their department.
CHAPTER

XIII.-Internal Government of the Republic.

XCVIII. Peru is divided into departments and litoral provinces : The departments into provinces; and the provinces into districts. The particularizing of the departments, provinces, districts, and of their respective boundaries, shall be the object of a law. XCIX. For the execution of the laws, that of judicial sentences, and for the preservation of the public order, there shall be Prefects in the departments and litoral provinces; Sub-Prefects in the provinces, Governments in the districts, and Lieutenant-Governors wherever they may be necessary. C. The Prefects shall be under the immediate dependence of the head of the Executive Power; the Sub-Prefects under that of the Prefects, and the Governors under that of the Sub-Prefects. CI. The Prefects and Sub-Prefects shall be named by the Government from a double ternary list furnished to them by the departmental juntas; and the duration of their office shall be for two years. The Governors shall be named from a single ternary list furnished by the local municipalities. The head of the Executive Power can dismiss the Prefects and Sub-Prefects agreeably to the law.

CII. The powers of these functionaries and the mode of enforcing their responsibility shall be made known by a law. CIII. The police functionaries charged with maintaining security and public order depend immediately upon the Executive, who shall nominate or dismiss them conformably to the law. XIV.-_Departmental Juntas. CIV. In the capital of each department there shall be a Junta composed of Deputies chosen in the way which the law requires, and whose duty it is to promote the interests of the department in general and those of the provinces in particular. CV. The same qualifications are required for a Deputy to the departmental Junta as for a representative to Congress, with the additional one of being resident in the department. CVI. Ecclesiastics and public employs who receive a salary from the State cannot be members of a Junta. CVII. It belongs to the Junta to verify the elections of their members, and to clear up any doubts respecting them. CVIII. At the time fixed by law, the Prefect shall open the sessions of the Junta, communicating to it in writing the state of public affairs as well as the improvements which it considers necessary for the department. If the Prefect does not notify the opening in time, it shall be notified by the Junta. CIX. The departmental Juntas shall meet annually, their sittings shall be public, and shall last for the period determined by the law. The order of their sittings shall be determined by an internal regulation. CX. They shall exercise the deliberative, consultative, and jurisdictional powers assigned by the law for the encouragement of all the means of progress within the department. They shall moreover make the necessary charges against the local functionaries of the Executive Power, whenever they violate the Constitution, the electoral law, or those relative to the interests of their departments. CXI. The law shall determine the funds of which the Juntas may avail themselves for the accomplishment of their duties. CXII. The resolutions of the Juntas shall be ordered to be carried into effect by the Prefects at the time and in the form which the law determines; and those which are at variance with express laws shall be null. CXIII. The Juntas shall be renewed by one-half every year, the same being effected in the first year by lot.
CHAPTER CHAPTER

XV.--municipalities.

CXIV. There shall be municipalities organized according to the . law in all the places appointed by the latter.




CXV. To the municipalities belong the administration, care, and encouragement of the local interests and those of the respective establishments which are within their territory; they are equally charged with the formation and preservation of the civic register as well as of that of the population, conformably to the law. CXVI. The election of the members of the municipalities shall be effected by citizens in exercise of their rights, in the manner appointed by the law, and neither ecclesiastics nor employees in receipt of a salary from the State are eligible. CXVII. The administration of the municipal funds shall exclusively belong to the magistrates, &c., in conformity with their respective regulations.
CHAPTER

XVI.-public Armed Force.

CXVIII. The object of the public armed force is to guarantee the rights of the nation abroad, and to secure order and the due execution of the laws at home. Military obedience shall be subordinate to the Constitution and the laws. CXIX. The public armed force is composed of the National Guards, of the Army, and Navy, under the organization designated by the law. All employment of the armed force belongs to the public. CXX. The national guards shall be organized in the proportion determined by the law, but no province shall fail to have at least one body of militia. CXXI. There cannot be in the army more than two Generals of division and four of brigade; nor in the navy more than one Rear Admiral. CXXII. There shall be no Generals commanding-in-chief, except in time of war declared conformably to this Constitution. CXXIII. Recruiting is forbidden; the public armed force can only be raised by the means expressly provided by the law.
CHATTER XVII.-The Judicial Power. CXXIV. Justice shall be administered by the tribunals and courts of justice. CXXV. The members of the judicial power are removable, and the law shall fix the duration of their employments. CXXVI. There shall be in the capital of the Republic one Supreme Court of Justice, in those of the departments, Superior Courts, according to the judgment of the Congress; in the provinces, Courts of Instance, and in all the towns, Courts of Justices of the Peace. The number of the courts of first instance in the provinces, and



that of justices of the peace courts in the towns, shall be determined by a law. CXXVII. The voting members of the Supreme Court shall be nominated by the Congress from a double ternary list furnished to it by the Executive Power; those of the superior courts and of the courts of first instance shall be nominated by the Executive from double ternary lists furnished by the Departmental Juntas. CXXVIII. Publicity is essential in trials; the tribunals cannot deliberate in secret, but the votes must be given aloud and with open doors. The reasons for the sentences shall be given, as well as the law or general principle upon which they are grounded. CXXIX. Every trial by commission is prohibited. CXXX. No power nor authority can remove to itself law-suits pending in another court, nor remove them to a court of another instance, nor revive law-suits already decided. CXXXI. Magistrates and judges incur State prosecutions for: 1. Prevarication. 2. Bribery. 3. Abbreviation or suspension of the judicial forms. 4. Illegal procedure against individual guarantees. CXXXII. For watching over the execution of the laws there shall be a National Fiscal or Legal Commissioner in the capital of the Republic, fiscals and agents of the same in the towns, all possessing the powers designated by the law. CXXXIII. The National Fiscal shall be nominated in the same manner as are the voting members of the Supreme Court of Justice ; those of the departments like the voting members of the superior courts, and the fiscal agents as the judges of first instance.
CHAPTER XVIII.-Reform of the Constitution.

CXXXIV. When one or more Constitutional Articles are to be reformed, the Bill for that purpose must be approved of in three successive Legislatures, and, as is the case with every Bill, must be previously discussed in each of the Chambers.
CHIAPTER XIX.-Temporary Provisions.

CXXXV. The renovation of the Congress in the two first Legislatures shall be effected by lot. CXXXVI. The VIth Article does not destroy the property of the employees, nor the rights acquired by them up to the date of this Constitution. CXXXVII. The Articles XXXIII and XXXIV do not deprive of the rights attached to the being a Peruvian by birth or by naturalization, such individuals as are in the lawful possession of such qualification.
CXXXVIII. Generals who are in lawful possession of the rank shall continue in it notwithstanding what has been provided. by Article CXXI, but upon his death no substitution can take place except when the number of such officers is below that specified in the same Article, and such substitution will but complete the number. CXXXIX. Exclusive tribunals and courts of justice, as well as their special Codes, shall continue until the law shall have made in them the necessary reforms. CXL. The Constitution shall be in force from the day of its promulgation, without the necessity of swearing to observe it. Given at the Hall of Sessions in Lima, on the 13th day of October, 1856.
