PERU.

BASIS of the Political Constitution of the Peruvian Repub(Translation.) lick.-Lima, 16th December, 1822.
ART. I. ALL the Provinces of Peru, united in one single Body, constitute the Peruvian Nation. II. The Sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation; it is independent of the Spanish Monarchy, and of every other Foreign Dominion, and can never become the patrimony of any Person or Family. III. The Nation shall be denominated The Peruvian Republick. IV. Its Government is popular representative. V. Its Religion is the Catholick, Apostolick, Roman, to the exclusion of the exercise of any other. VI. To the Nation appertains the formation of its Constitution and Laws, by means of its Representatives. VII. All the Citizens must assist in the election of their Representatives, after the manner which shall be established by the Constitution; this being the only function of the National Power which must be fulfilled without the right of delegating it. VIII. The basis of the Representation shall be the Population. IX. The Constitution shall provide for: 1. The liberty of the Citizens. 2. The liberty of the Press. 3. Personal security, and that of domicile. 4. The inviolability of property. 5. The secrecy of Correspondence. 6. Equality before the Law, in respect of rewards and punishments. 7. The equal distribution of taxation, in proportion to the means of Individuals, as well as the equal discharge of Publick duties. 8. The Individual right of presenting Petitions and Applications to Congress or Government. 9. The abolition of all confiscations of property. 10. The abolition of all cruel and infamy-descending punishments. 11. The abolition of hereditary Offices and Privileges. 12. The abolition of the Slave Trade. X. The most essential principle, for the establishment and preservation of liberty, consists in the division of the three principal Functions of the National Authority, commonly called the Three Powers, which shall be as distinct from, and as independent of, each other, as possible. XI. The Legislative Power shall be essentially distinct, so as not to act against itself. XII. The initiative of the Laws shall belong solely to the Representatives of the Nation assembled in Congress. XIII. The Deputies to Congress, as Representatives of the Nation, shall be inviolable in their Persons, and shall not be responsible for their opinions. XIV. The exercise of the Executive Power shall never be for life, much less hereditary. XV. The Representatives of the Executive Power, and the Ministers of State, shall be responsible, generally, for the Resolutions adopted by them in common, and each Minister, individually, for the acts peculiar to his Department. XVI. There shall be a Central Senate, composed of Individuals elected by the Provinces, two for each, agreeably to the mode described in the Constitution. Their principal attributes shall be: 1. To watch over the observance of the Constitution and the Laws, and over the conduct of the Magistrates and Citizens. 2. To elect, and present to the Executive Power, the Officers of the Civil List of the State ; and to elect tie Ecclesiasticks who are to be named for the Nation.

 920 


PORTUGAL AND BRAZIL.

921

3. To convoke a Congress Extraordinary, in the cases prescribed by the Constitution. XVII. The Judicial Power shall be independent. The Judges shall be immoveable and for life. In Criminal Cases, the trial shall be publick, the fact shall be recognized and declared by a Jury, and the Law pronounced by the Judges. XVIII. The imposition of Contributions, and the mode of apportioning them, shall be settled exclusively by the Congress. XIX. The Constitution shall recognize the Debt of the State, and the Congress shall establish suitable means for the payment of the interest thereof, and the liquidation of the principal. XX. There shall be a Publick Armed Force, the amount of which shall be annually fixed by Congress. Its object shall be to maintain the external and internal security of the State, under the direction of the Executive Power. XX1. Education is necessary to all, and is a debt which Society owes to every one of its Members. Congress will resolve on whatever may be requisite for primary instruction, and for the encouragement of science, literature, and the fine arts. XXII. Publick Hospitals are an obligation due to Society. Congress will provide for the Institutions of charity and beneficence. XXIII. To maintain union among the Citizens, to cherish the love of our Country, and to commemorate our most signal efforts for emancipation from the Spanish Dominion, National Festivals shall be instituted, on such days, and in such manner, as Congress shall determine. XXIV. The Constitution now drawn up shall be submitted for the ratification, or amendment, of a General Congress, consisting of Deputies from the Provinces which are actually free, and from those which may be unoccupied by the Enemy. Let this be understood, and take the necessary measures for its fulfilment, by causing it to be printed, published, and circulated. Given in the Chamber of Congress, in Lima, the 16th of December, 1822,--3rd Year of Independence- Ist of the Republick. JUAN ANTONIO DE ANDUEZA, President. [Here follow the Signatures of the Deputies.]

CONSTITUTION Politique de la Monarchie Portugaise. (Traduction.) Lisbonne, 1e23 Septembre, 182"2. CONSTITUTION DES CORTES, DE 1822. Dom JOAO, par ]a grace de Dieu, et par la Constitution de la Monarchie, Roi du Royaume Uni de Portugal, du Brsil et des Algarves, au delit et en deqa de la Mer, en Afrique, &c. Je fais savoir

