BRITISH AND FOREIGN

STATE PAPERS

1955-56
VOL. 162
Compiled and Edited in the Librarian's Department of the Foreign Office

LONDON
HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE 1965

CONSTITUTION of the Republic of Vietnam.—Saigon, 26th October, 1956(') (Translation) Confident in the glorious and enternal destiny of the Vietnamese State and nation, a destiny which is guaranteed by the victorious struggles of our ancestors and the indomitable will of our people ; Confident in the perpetuity of our civilisation which rests on foundations of the spirit and the propagation of which is the duty of all citizens ; (1) Date of promulgation.

VIETNAM	

1057

Confident that the transcendent value of free, harmonious and complete development for the individual as well as for the community as a whole must be the object of all State endeavour ; Conscious that the Constitution must meet the aspirations of entire nation from the point of Ca-Mau to the Gate of am-Quam, these aspirations being: The consolidation of national independence and the struggle against all forms of domination and imperialism ; The safeguard of liberty for each individual and for the tion The setting up, for the benefit of the individual and all ses of the population, of a political, economic, social and altural domestic regime. Conscious that liberty, which is the ability to obey reason moral precepts, can only be preserved if collective security is assured and the legitimate rights of man respected ;
:1

Conscious that our country being situated at the crosfintealmucionsdgratu peolmustbradyceivhuntsofprgewih view to perfecting before the Almighty and before humanity , mis ion which is the building of a human civil sation for We safeguard and development of man in his entirety ; , members of the National Assembly, adopt the Con the purport of which is as follows : CHAPTER I—BASIC PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1 Vietnam
Republic.

is an independent, unified, territorially indivisible
ARTICLE

2 sovereignty is vested in the whole nation.
ARTICLE 3 The nation vests the executive powers in a President elected the people, and the legislative powers in a National assemmbly also elected by the people. The separation of the
81293	 2L

1058	

VIETNAM

powers between the executive and legislative agencies must clearly defined and brought into harmony. The President of the Republic is the head of the State.
ARTICLE

4

The executive, the legislative and the judiciary have as their responsibility the defence of freedom, democracy, the republicanfomgvet,dpublicor. The judiciary shall have an independent status.
ARTICLE

5

All citizens without distinction of sex are born equal: in dignity, rights and duties, and must act towards each other in a spirit of fraternity and solidarity. The State recognises and guarantees the fundamental rights of the human person in his individual capacity and as member of the community. The State shall endeavour to establish equal opportunities for all and the necessary conditions for the enjoyment of their rights and the performance of their duties. The State shall aid economic development, cultural, tific and technical expansion and progress.
ARTICLE scien-

6

Every citizen has a duty towards the Fatherland, the community and fellow citizens in the pursuit of the harmonious and complete development of his personality and that of others. ARTICLE 7 All activities having as their objective the direct or indirect propagation or establishment of communism in whatever form shall be contrary to the principles embodied in the present Constitution. ARTICLE 8 The Republic of Vietnam shall adhere to the principles of international law which are not contrary to the conception of national sovereignty and equality among nations.

VIETNAM	

1059

The Republic shall endeavour to contribute to the maintenance of world peace and security as well as to strengthening the bonds of friendship which unite it with other peoples on a basis of freedom and equality. CHAPTER II—RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE CITIZEN
ARTICLE 9

Every citizen has the right to life, liberty, and security and integrity of his person.
ARTICLE 10

No one may be illegally arrested, detained, or exiled. Except in cases of flagrante clench), no arrest may be made without an order from the competent authorities which conforms with the conditions and procedures prescribed by law. In accordance with the procedures prescribed by law in cases of crime and misdemeanour, the accused shall have the right to choose his defence counsel or request that one be designated for him.
ARTICLE 11

No person may be tortured or subjected to brutal, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment.
ARTICLE

12

The private life, family, home dignity and reputation of every citizen shall be respected. The privacy of correspondence may not be violated except
by order of the courts or in cases necessitated by the protection of national security or the preservation of public order. Everybody shall be entitled to the protection of the law against illegal interference.
ARTICLE

13

All citizens have the right to circulate freely and reside anywhere in the national territory except in cases prohibited by law for reasons of public health or public security.
81293	 2L2

1060	

VIETNAM

All citizens have the right to leave the country except in cases restricted by law for security, national defence, economic or financial reasons or in the public interest.
ARTICLE 14

Every one has the right and the duty to work. Pay shall be equal for equal work. Everyone shall be entitled to an equitable remuneration guaranteeing to him and to his family an existence consistent with human dignity.
ARTICLE 15

Every citizen has the right to freedom of thought and, within the limits laid down by law, of meeting and association.
ARTICLE 16

Every citizen has the right to freedom of expression. This right may not be used for false accusation, slander, outrage against public morals, incitement to internal disturbance or for the overthrow of the republican form of government. Every citizen has the right to liberty of the press in order to establish a truthful and constructive opinion which the State must defend against all efforts to distort the truth.
ARTICLE 17

Every citizen has the right to freedom of belief and to religious practice and teaching, providing that the exercise of these rights is not contrary to morality.
ARTICLE 18

In accordance with the procedures and conditions prescribed by law, every citizen has the right to vote and to take part in the direction of public affairs either directly or through his representatives.
ARTICLE 19

Every citizen has the right to hold public office, according to his ability and on a basis of equality.

VIETNAM	 ARTICLE

1061

20

The State recognises and guarantees the right to private property. The law shall prescribe the procedure for the acquisition of property and for the enjoyment of this right, in order that everyone may become a proprietor assured of a worthy and free life and, at the same time, that a prosperous society may be built up. In certain circumstances prescribed by law and subject to compensation, the State may expropriate property in the public interest. ARTICLE 21 The State shall facilitate the use of private savings to acquire dwellings, agricultural land and shares in business corporations.
ARTICLE

22

Every citizen has the right to form economic associations provided the aim of such associations is not to establish illegal monopolies engaged in speculation and manipulation of the economy. The 'State shall encourage and facilitate non-speculative associations on the basis of mutual benefit. The State does not recognise monopolies in business except in cases determined by law for reasons of national defence and security or in the public interest.
ARTICLE 23

The right to free trade unions and the right of workers to strike are recognised and may be exercised in conformity with the procedures and conditions prescribed by law. Public officials have no right to strike. The right to strike is not recognised in respect of personnel and workers employed in national defence, public security and the public utilities. The law shall define the above mentioned catagories and ensure to such personnel and workers a status which will protect their rights.
81293	 2L3

1062	

VIETNAM ARTICLE 24

Within the limits of its capacity and of the economic progress, the State shall take effective measures to assist cases of unemployment, old age, illness, natural disasters or other misfortunes. ARTICLE 25 The State recognises the family as the basis of the society. The State shall encourage and facilitate the formation of family units and, in fulfilment of this objective, give special attention to maternity and infant care. The State will encourage family unity.
ARTICLE

26

The State will endeavour to give every citizen a compulsory and free basic education. Every citizen has the right to pursue studies. Those who have the ability but lack private means shall be assisted in the pursuit of their studies. The State recognises the right of parents to choose the schools for their children, and of associations as well as individuals to open schools in accordance with conditions laid down by law. The State will recognise private universities and technical institutes which satisfy the legal requirements. The diplomas granted by these bodies will be recognised by the State.
ARTICLE

27

Every citizen has the right to participate in cultural and scientific activities, and to enjoy the benefits of the fine arts and of technical progress. Authors shall enjoy legal protection for their works and material rights in respect of scientific inventions, literary and artistic productions.
ARTICLE

28

The civic rights of every citizen shall be exercised in conformity with the procedures and conditions prescribed by law.

VIETNAM	

1063

The rights of citizens shall only be subject to legal restriction in order to ensure the rights of other citizens and the legitimate requirements of general security, morality, public order and national defence. A citizen who abuses the rights recognised by the present Constitution with the object of jeopardising the republican form of government, the democratic regime, national freedom, independence and unity shall be deprived of his rights.
ARTICLE 29

It is the duty of every citizen to respect and defend the Constitution and the law. It is the duty of every citizen to defend the Fatherland, the republican form of government, freedom and democracy. Every citizen shall fulfil his military obligations in conformity with the requirements and within the limits prescribed by law. Every one shall contribute to public expenditure in proportion to his means. CHAPTER III—THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
ARTICLE 30

The President of the Republic is elected by universal and direct suffrage with secret ballot. The law shall determine the procedures for the election of the President of the Republic in which electors throughout the country may participate. The Vice-President of the Republic is elected simultaneously with the President and on the same ticket.
ARTICLE 31

Those citizens shall have the right to stand for the Presidency or Vice-Presidency of the Republic who fulfil the following conditions : (1) To have been born on Vietnamese territory and possess Vietnamese nationality without interruption since birth or to have recovered Vietnamese nationality before the date of the promulgation of the Constitution. (2) To have been resident in the national territory with or without interruption for a period of at least fifteen years.

1064	

VIETNAM

(3) To be forty years of age. (4) To enjoy the rights of citizenship. The offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be incompatible with any other paid or unpaid activity in the private domain. ARTICLE 32 The President and Vice-President of the Republic are elected for five years. They are eligible for re-election for two terms.
ARTICLE

33

The terms of the President and of the Vice-President of the Republic shall expire exactly at noon on the last day of the sixtieth month beginning from the day they effectively assumed office. Whereupon, the terms of the newly-appointed President and Vice-President shall begin. The terms of the President and Vice-President of the Republic may end before the normal time in the following circumstances: (1) Death ; (2) Incapacity by reason of serious or prolonged illness to exercise the powers and fulfil the duties of the office. This incapacity must be agreed by the National Assembly by a fourfifth majority of the total number of deputies, after medical certification and cross examination. (3) Resignation duly tendered to the National Assembly ; (4) Deposition under Article 81 by the Special Court of Justice. ARTICLE 34 The election of a new President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take place on a Sunday three weeks before the expiry of the terms of the President and Vice-President in office. In case of a vacancy occurring before the expiry of the presidential term of office, the Vice-President of the Republic shall assume the functions of President until the end of the term.

VIETNAM	

1065

In the circumstances mentioned in the preceding paragraph, where there shall be no Vice-President of the Republic or where the Vice-President of the Republic for some reason is unable to assume the presidential functions, the President of the National Assembly shall temporarily exercise the functions of President of the Republic in order to expedite current affairs and organise the election of a new President and a new VicePresident of the Republic within a , maximum period of two months. In this case, the first Vice-President of the Assembly shall assume the acting presidency of the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

35

The President of the Republic, with the approval by the National Assembly, concludes and ratifies international treaties and conventions. The President of the Republic appoints ambassadors, accredits foreign diplomatic representatives and represents the nation in its relations with foreign countries.
ARTICLE 36

With the agreement of one half of the members of the National Assembly, the President may declare war and conclude peace treaties. ARTICLE 37 The President of the Republic appoints and dismisses all military and civil servants in conformity with existing laws unless the present Constitution otherwise prescribes. The President of the Republic is Supreme Commander of the armed forces. The President of the Republic bestows all decorations. The President of the Republic may exert the right of pardon, mitigation, commutation and cancellation of penalty.
ARTICLE 38

In case of war or internal disturbances, the term of office of deputies as defined in the Constitution shall automatically be extended at the expiry of their normal terms of office.

1066	

VIETNAM

In case an electoral district shall be placed in a state of emergency, alert , or siege, the President of the Republic may extend the term of office of the deputies for that district. Normally, general or partial elections shall be held at the latest within six months of the special circumstances referred to in the two preceding paragraphs.
ARTICLE

39

The President of the Republic communicates with the National Assembly by message. The President of the Republic may attend the sessions of the National Assembly and speak before it. Each year at the beginning of the second regular session of the National Assembly and whenever he deems it necessary, the President of the Republic shall make a statement to the National Assembly on the domestic and foreign policies of the Government. ARTICLE 40 The President of the Republic may, with the consent of the Assembly, hold a referendum. The results of the referendum must be respected by the President of the Republic and by the National Assembly. ARTICLE 41 Between two sessions of the National Assembly the President of the Republic may, for reasons of emergency, sign orders in council. These orders in Council shall be transmitted immediately after signature to the Bureau of the Assembly. If the National Assembly does not reject these orders in council during its next regular session, the orders shall become law.
ARTICLE

42

In cases of emergency, war, internal disturbances or financial or economic crisis, the National Assembly may pass a law conferring on the President special powers to sign orders in council for a certain period and within limits defined by the said law passed by the National Assembly.

VIETNAM	

1067

Such orders in council must be communicated to the Bureau of the National Assembly immediately after signature. Thirty days after the expiry of the time limit specified in the law conferring the special powers, these orders in council shall become law provided they are not rejected by the National Assembly. ARTICLE 43 In case where the budget has not been agreed within the period defined in Article 60, the President of the Republic may sign budgetary orders in council providing for the coming financial period. In each quarter the President of the Republic may expend one fourth of the budget until such time as the National Assembly shall have passed by final vote the law concerning the budget. Problems resulting from the rejection or alteration of the provisional budgetary orders in 'council shall be resolved by the budgetary law passed by the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

44

The President of the Republic may sign a decree proclaiming a state of emergency, alert or siege in one or more areas ; this decree may temporarily suspend the application of one or-more laws in these areas.
ARTICLE

45

Upon assuming office the President of the Republic shall take the following oath: " I solemnly swear to fulfil the obligations of President of the Republic to the best of my ability ; •to respect and defend the Constitution ; to serve the Fatherland faithfully and to devote myself entirely to the public interest."
ARTICLE 46

The President of the Republic shall be assisted by a Vice President of the Republic, Secretaries of State and UnderSecretaries of State The two last mentioned shall be appointed by the President of the Republic and shall be directly responsible to him.

1068	

VIETNAM ARTICLE

47 Secretaries of State and Under-Secretaries of State may
confer with the President and Vice-President of the National Assembly and the Chairmen of Committees of the National Assembly in order to discuss legislative problems.

CHAPTER IV—THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SECTION 1—The Deputies
ARTICLE

48

The electoral law shall specify the number of deputies to sit in the National Assembly as well as the number of electoral constituencies.
ARTICLE

49

The deputies shall be elected by universal and direct suffrage, with secret ballot, in accordance with the procedures and conditions determined by the electoral law.
ARTICLE

50

Those citizens may be candidates for the National Assembly who: 1. Possess Vietnamese nationality without interruption from birth ; or have obtained Vietnamese nationality at least five years, or recovered Vietnamese nationality at least three years prior to candidacy, but excluding those who have recovered Vietnamese nationality before the promulgation of the present Constitution ; 2. Enjoy full rights of citizenship ; 3. Have reached the age of twenty-five years before election day ; 4. Fulfil all the other conditions laid down in the electoral law. However, in special cases where persons have recovered or acquired Vietnamese nationality and have rendered exceptional services to the Fatherland, the President may by decree reduce the five year and three year requirements cited above.

VIETNAM	 ARTICLE

1069

51

The term of office for deputies shall be three years. Deputies may be re-elected. Election to a new Assembly shall take place one month before the expiry of the term of the existing Assembly.
ARTICLE

52

When a deputy resigns, dies or if his appointment is terminated for any reason whatsoever, the election of a replacement shall take place within three months. There shall be no replacement elected if the vacancy occurs within six months before the end of the original term of office.
ARTICLE

53

The office of deputy is incompatible with any other remunerated public function or with any other elected office. Civil servants who are elected will take leave of absence ; military personnel will be demobilised. The office of deputy is incompatible with the appointment of Secretary or Under-Secretary of State. However, deputies may be charged with special missions not lasting more than twelve months each nor exceeding in toto one half of the life of the Assembly. While discharging such special assignments, deputies shall not have the right to debate or to vote in the National Assemblies or it committees. Deputies may hold teaching posts in universities and higher technical schools. In no case may deputies take part in competitive bidding sponsored by government organs or enter into contracts with them. ARTICLE 54 No deputy may be pursued arrested, imprisoned or sentenced for anything he may have said or any vote he may have cast in the Assembly or any of its committees. Except in cases of high treason, injury to the security of the State, or flagrante delicto no deputy may be pursued, arrested, imprisoned or sentenced during the whole period of National Assembly sessions, including the time travelling to the Assembly and returning from it.

1070	
SECTION

VIETNAM

2—The Powers of the National Assembly
ARTICLE

55 The National Assembly approves the laws. It also approves international treaties and conventions.
SECTION

3—Legislative Procedures
ARTICLE

56 Deputies may introduce proposals for laws to the National Assembly ; the President of the Republic may submit bills to the National Assembly for examination.
ARTICLE 57

Bills and proposals for laws approved by the Assembly shall be delivered to the President within a period of seven full days. The President shall promulgate such laws within a period of thirty full days from the date of receiving them. In a case declared by the Assembly to be urgent, the period for promulgation shall be reduced to seven full days. 58 During the period allowed for promulgation, the President may communicate to the Assembly an explanatory message calling upon that body to reconsider one or more provisions of a law which it has approved. If after a second reading the modifications proposed by the President are rejected, the Assembly may pass the law by a roll-call of three-fourths of its membership.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 59 If during the period stipulated in Article 57 the President of the Republic neither promulgates nor returns to the National Assembly for consideration a bill which it has earlier approved, that vote bill shall become law. ARTICLE 60

Proposals for the budget shall be sent to the Bureau of the Assembly before the 30th September. The budget shall be voted before 31st December.

VIETNAM	 ARTICLE 61

1071

Deputies have the right to initiate expenditures but they shall at the same time propose corresponding sources of income. SECTION 4—Functioning of the National Assembly
ARTICLE 62

The National Assembly meets in regular and special sessions.
ARTICLE 63

There shall be two regular sessions each year, one beginning on the first Monday in April and one beginning on the first Monday in October. Neither regular session shall last longer than three months. ARTICLE 64 The National Assembly shall be convened in special session if the President of the Republic or more than one half of the membership of the Assembly so demand. When convened by the President the agenda for the special session shall be drawn up by the President. When convened on the demand of the deputies the agenda shall be drawn up by the Bureau of the Assembly. The duration of each special session may not exceed thirty days. ARTICLE 65 The National Assembly meets in public. It may meet in closed session if a majority of more than one-half of the members present, or the President of the Republic, so demands. Verbatim reports of the discussions and copies of documents produced in the Assembly, except in the case of closed sessions, shall be published in the Official Journal. '
ARTICLE 66

To control the legality of the election of its members, the National Assembly shall set up a control committee responsible to the National Assembly on the matter. The National Assembly has full powers of decision.

1072	

VIETNAM ARTICLE 67

The National Assembly elects a Bureau composed President, two Vice-Presidents, one Secretary General, Assistant Secretaries General and the necessary staff. The Assembly appoints various committees.
ARTICLE 68

of a three

cedure

The National Assembly shall adopt its own rules of especially with regard to:

pro-

The internal organisation of the Assembly and its Bureau ; the Assembly's rules of procedure and the competence of the Bureau ; discipline and disciplinary sanctions within the Assembly ; the composition and functions of the committees.
ARTICLE

69

A bill or a proposal approved by the National Assembly is valid if the majority vote received is not less than one third of the total number of deputies.

CHAPTER V—THE JUDGES
ARTICLE

70

To discharge the duties set forth in Article 4, the judiciary shall be organised in accordance with the principles of equality of all persons before the law, and the independence of magistrates on the bench.
ARTICLE

71

Judges shall make decisions in accordance with the law and their own consciences and in the interests of the nation.
ARTICLE

72

Under the direction of the Department of Justice, the public prosecutors shall supervise the application of the law, the observance of good behaviour, and public order.

VIETNAM	 ARTICLE 73

1073

A High Council of the Judiciary shall be established charged with supervising the application of the Public Prosecutors' Statute. The organisation, functions and powers of the High Council of the Judiciary shall be determined by law.

CHAPTER VI THE SPECIAL COURT OF JUSTICE
ARTICLE 74

The Special Court of Justice shall be a court competent to judge the President and Vice-President of the Republic, the President of the High Court of Appeal and the President of the Constitutional Court where charges of treason or serious crime are brought against them.
ARTICLE 75

The Special Court of Justice shall include the following The President of the High Court of Appeal as President ; Fifteen deputies, elected by the National Assembly for each of its terms, as counsellors. When the President of the High Court of Appeal is the accused, the President of the Constitutional Court shall sit as President of the Special Court of Justice.
ARTICLE 76

The Commission of Inquiry of the Special Court of Justice shall include five deputies elected by the National Assembly far each of its terms. ARTICLE 77 A charge may be brought in the following manner : (a) A motion containing the reasons for a charge must be signed by three-fifths of the membership of the Assembly and presented to the Bureau of the Assembly fifteen days before the debate begins ; (b) That motion must be approved by two-thirds of the membership of the Assembly ;

1074	

VIETNAM

(c) Deputies serving on the Special Court of Justice or on the Commission of Inquiry shall not have the right to sign such motion of accusation or to vote on that motion. ARTICLE 78

The accused shall be suspended from his functions from the date the motion of accusation is passed by the National Assembly until the decision of the Special Court of Justice is made known. During that period the procedure set forth in Article 34, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall obtain.
ARTICLE 79

The Commission of Inquiry has the right to summon witnesses and to compel interested agencies to place secret documents and files at its disposal. The Commission of Inquiry shall present its report within two months unless an additional month is sanctioned by the Special Court of Justice.
ARTICLE 80

The Special Court of Justice shall convene to hear the statements of the Commission of Inquiry and the accused ; it shall reach its decision by a three-fourths vote of the membership of the Court.
ARTICLE 81 If the accused is found guilty, the Special Court of Justice shall order his removal from office. This decision enters into force immediately.

CHAPTER WI—THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL
ARTICLE 82 The National Economic Council shall have the task of proposing and advising on economic projects and proposals. The National Economic Council shall be chosen from. among economists and other branches of economic activity, and from professional and social organisations and associations related to the economy.

VIETNAM	

1075

Membership of the National Economic Council is incompatible with membership of the National Assembly.
ARTICLE 83

The Vice-President of the Republic is chairman of the National Economic Council.
ARTICLE 84

Law shall prescribe the organisation and functioning of the National Economic Council. CHAPTER VIII—THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT
ARTICLE 85 A Constitutional Court decides on the legality of laws, orders in council and administrative regulations. ARTICLE 86

For the duration of each National Assembly the Constitutional Court shall be composed of : A chairman appointed by the President with the consent of the National Assembly ; Four high ranking judges or lawyers appointed by the President ; Four deputies elected by the National Assembly.
ARTICLE

87

The Constitutional Court receives submissions from various courts for decisions on the legality of laws, orders in council and administrative regulations. The decisions of the Constitutional Court shall have the effect of suspending the application of unconstitutional clauses from the date the decision is published in the Official Journal.
ARTICLE

88

Law shall prescribe the organisation and functioning of the Constitutional Court as well as the procedure to be followed by that body.
81293	 2L4

1076 	

VIETNAM

CHAPTER IX—AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
ARTICLE

89

Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4, and the present Article of the Constitution may be neither amended nor abrogated.
ARTICLE

90

The President of the Republic or two-thirds of the membership of the National Assembly may propose amendments to the Constitution. Proposals for amendment of the Constitution, citing the reasons therefor, must bear the necessary number of signatures and be delivered to the Bureau of the Assembly.
ARTICLE 91

After acknowledgment in due form of the proposed amendment to the Constitution, the Bureau of the National Assembly shall convene a special session of the Assembly to appoint a committee of at least fifteen members to study the proposal and to seek the advice of the Constitutional Court and the President of the Republic. This committee shall report to a special session of the Assembly within a maximum period of sixty days.
ARTICLE 92

The proposed constitutional amendment must be approved or assented to by three-fourths of the total number of deputies voting in person in a roll-call vote.
ARTICLE

93

The approved proposal shall be promulgated in accordance with the procedure set forth in Articles 57, 58 and 59. If the amendment is returned for a second reading, the National Assembly decides by a final vote taken by threefourths of the total number of deputies voting in person in a roll-call vote.

VIETNAM	

1077

CHAPTER X—GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 94

The Constitution shall be promulgated on 26th October, 1956.
ARTICLE

95

The National Assembly elected on 4th March, 1956, will be the first legislative Assembly according to the Constitution of the Republic of Vietnam. The term of office of the legislative Assembly begins as from the promulgation of the Constitution and will end on 30th September, 1959. ARTICLE 96 The present President of the Republic who, in the referendum of 23rd October, 1955, was charged by the people with establishing a democratic regime, is the first President of the Republic according to the Constitution of the Republic of Vietnam. The' term of office of the President begins on the date of the promulgation of the Constitution and will end on 30th April, 1961. ARTICLE 97 During the first session of the first legislative Assembly the present President of the Republic shall designate the first VicePresident of the Republic. This designation, when it has been approved by the Assembly, is final. Should the necessity arise, the designation of a new VicePresident shall follow the same procedure throughout the term of the first President. ARTICLE 98 During the first legislative term, the President of the Republic may decree a temporary suspension of the rights of freedom of movement and residence, of speech and the press, of assembly and association, of the formation of labour unions and of strikes, to meet the legitimate demands of public security and order and of national defence.

