CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
by SEN. NGUYEN VAN HUYEN

Issued September 1971

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1971 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

Text of the New Constitution

PREAMBLE Confident that the patriotism, indomitable will and unyielding traditions of the people will assure a radiant future for our country; Conscious that after many years of foreign domination, followed by the partition of the national territory, dictatorship and war, the people of Vietnam must take responsibility before history to perpetuate their self-reliant spirit and at the same time to welcome progressive ideas in order to establish a republican form of government of the people, by the people, and for the people for the purpose of uniting the nation, unifying the territory, and assuring independence, freedom and democracy with justice and altruism for the present and future generations; We, the 117 Deputies of the National Constituent Assembly representing the people of Vietnam, after debate, approve the following Constitution. CHAPTER I: BASIC PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1

(1) Vietnam is an independent, unified and territorially indivisible Republic. (2) Sovereignty resides in the whole people.
ARTICLE 2

(1) The State recognizes and guarantees the basic rights of every citizen. (2) The State advocates equality of all citizens without discrimination as to sex, religion, race or political party. Minority compatriots will receive special support so that they can keep up with the rate of progress of the population as a whole. (3) Every citizen has the duty to serve the interests of the nation and the people.
ARTICLE 3

The functions and powers of the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government must be clearly delineated. Activities of these three branches must be coordinated and harmonized in order to realize social order and prosperity on the basis of freedom, democracy and social justice.
ARTICLE 4

The Republic of Vietnam opposes Communism in any form. Every activity designed to publicize or carry out Communism is prohibited.
ARTICLE 5

(1) The Republic of Vietnam will comply with those provisions of international

1

law which are not contrary to its national sovereignty and the principle of equality between nations. (2) The Republic of Vietnam is determined to oppose all forms of aggression and strives to contribute to the building of international peace and security. CHAPTER II: RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS

ARTICLE 6 ARTICLE 7

The State respects human dignity. The law protects the freedom, lives, property and honor of every citizen.

ARTICLE 10

(1) The State respects and guarantees the freedom of religious belief and the freedom of every citizen to preach and practice religion as long as it does not infringe upon the national interest and is not harmful to public safety and order or contrary to good morals. (2) No religion is recognized as the State religion. The State is impartial in the development of various religions.

ARTICLE 9

(1) The private life, home and correspondence of the citizen must be respected. (2) No one has the right to enter, search the residence and confiscate the property of a citizen unless in possession of a court order, or when this is necessary to the protection of public security and order within the limits of the law. (3) Privacy of correspondence is protected by law. Any restriction imposed on this right must be determined by law.

ARTICLE 8

(1) The State respects and protects the security of each individual and the right of every citizen to plead his case before a Court of Law. (2) No one can be arrested or detained without a legal order issued by an agency with judicial powers conferred upon it by law, except in case of flagrante delicto. (3) The accused and his next of kin must be informed of the accusation against him within the time limit prescribed by law. Detentions must be controlled by an agency of the Judiciary. (4) No citizen can be tortured, threatened or forced to confess. A confession obtained by torture, threat or coercion will not be considered as valid evidence. (5) A defendant is entitled to a speedy and public trial. (6) A defendant has the right to a defense lawyer for counsel in every phase of the interrogation, including the preliminary investigation. (7) Any person accused of a minor offense who does not have a record of more than three months imprisonment for an intentional crime may be released pending trial, provided that he or she is employed and has a fixed residence. Women pregnant more than three months accused of minor offenses who are employed and have a fixed residence can be released pending trial. (8) Accused persons will be considered innocent until sentence recognizing their guilt is handed down. In event of doubt, the court will rule in favor of the accused. (9) If unjustly detained a person has the right to demand, in accordance with the provisions of law, compensation for damages from the State after he has been pronounced innocent. (10) No one can be detained for indebtedness.

(1) The State recognizes freedom of education. (2) Basic education is compulsory and free of charge. (3) University education is autonomous. (4) Talented persons who do not have means will be given support to continue their studies.

2

ARTICLE 12

(1) Culture and education must be considered matters of national policy on a national, scientific and humanistic basis. (2) An appropriate budget must be reserved for the development of culture and education.

ARTICLE 11

(5) The State encourages and supports research and creative work by citizens in the fields of science, letters and the arts.

ARTICLE 14

(1) Every citizen has the right to meet and form associations within the framework of the law. (2) Every citizen has the right to vote, run for office and participate in public affairs on an equal basis and in accordance with conditions and procedures prescribed by law. (3) The State respects the political rights of all citizens, including the right to petition freely and engage in overt, non-violent and legal opposition.

ARTICLE 13

(1) The State respects freedom of thought, speech, press and publishing as long as it does not harm personal honor, national security or good morals. (2) Censorship is not accepted except for motion pictures and the theater. (3) Press regulations will be prescribed by law.

ARTICLE 16 ARTICLE 17

Every citizen has the right and the duty to work and will receive fair remuneration enabling him and his family to live in dignity. The State will endeavor to create employment for all citizens. Freedom to join labor unions and to strike is respected within the framework and procedures of the law.

ARTICLE 15

Every citizen enjoys freedom to choose his place of residence and freedom of movement including the right to go and return from abroad except when these freedoms are restricted by law for reasons of public health, security and defense.

(1) Freedom of enterprise and competition is recognized, but it cannot be exercised to secure monopoly or control of the market. (2) The State encourages and assists economic cooperation which has the nature of mutual assistance. (3) The State gives special support to those elements of society which have a low standard of living.

ARTICLE 20

(1) The State recognizes and guarantees the right of private property. (2) The State advocates a policy of making the people property owners. (3) Expropriation or requisition by the State for the common good must be accompanied by speedy and just compensation at price levels existing at time of expropriation or requisition.

ARTICLE 19

(1) The State endeavors to establish a system of social security. (2) It is the duty of the State to establish a system of social assistance and public health. (3) It is the duty of the State to support the nation's warriors both spiritually and materially to protect and raise the wards of the nation.

ARTICLE 18

(1) The State recognizes the family as the foundation of society. The State encourages and assists in the formation of families, and cares for mothers and infants. (2) Marriage must be based on mutual consent, equality and cooperation. (3) The State encourages family cohesion.

3

ARTICLE 21

ARTICLE 23

On the basis of equality between duties and rights, workers have the right to choose representatives to participate in the management of business enterprises, especially in matters concerning wages and conditions of work within the framework and procedures of the law.

ARTICLE 22

The State advocates raising the standard of living of rural citizens and especially helping farmers to have land for cultivation.

(1) Military personnel elected to public office or serving in positions in the central government must be demobilized or take leave of absence without salary, according to their choice. (2) Military personnel on active duty are not permitted to engage in political party activity. (1) The State recognizes the presence of racial minorities in the Vietnamese community. (2) The State respects the customs and habits of the minority compatriots. Customary courts will be established to pronounce judgments in some cases involving customs and minority compatriots. (3) A law will prescribe special rights in order to assist minority compatriots. Every citizen has the duty to defend the Fatherland and the Republic. Every citizen has the duty to defend the Constitution and respect the law.

ARTICLE 24

ARTICLE 25

ARTICLE 26 ARTICLE 27 ARTICLE 28

Every citizen has the duty to fulfill his military obligations as prescribed by law.

ARTICLE 29

Every citizen has the duty to pay taxes in accordance with the provisions of law.

Any restriction upon the basic rights of the citizens must be prescribed by law and the time and place within which such a restriction is in force must be clearly specified. In any event the essence of all the basic rights of the citizens cannot be violated. CHAPTER HI: THE LEGISLATIVE

ARTICLE 30

ARTICLE 32

The House of Representatives includes from 100 to 200 representatives. (1) Representatives are elected by universal suffrage direct and secret ballot. Candidates run as individuals from separate constituencies no larger than provinces. (2) Representatives serve for four years. They may be re-elected. (3) The election for a new House of Representatives will be completed at least one month prior to the completion of the term of the old House. To run for the House of Representatives citizens must: (1) Hold Vietnamese citizenship at birth or have held Vietnamese citizenship for at least seven years or have held Vietnamese citizenship for at least five years counting up to the day of election; (2) Be at least 25 years of age on the day of the election;

ARTICLE 31

Legislative authority is vested by the people in the National Assembly. The National Assembly includes two houses, the House of Representatives and the Senate.

4

(3) Enjoy full rights of citizenship; (4) Have draft status in order; (5) Meet other conditions specified in the electoral law. THE SENATE The Senate includes from 30 to 60 members. (1) Senators are elected at large by universal suffrage, direct and secret ballot. Election is by list voting and on a basis of plurality. Each list includes from onethird to one-sixth of the total membership of the Senate. (2) Senators serve for six years. One-half of the Senate is re-elected every three years. Senators may be re-elected. (3) Members of the first Senate will be divided into two groups by drawing lots. The first group will serve six years, the second group three years. (4) The election of one-half of the Senate must take place at least one month before the term of that half of the Senate ends.

ARTICLE 33

Candidates for the Senate must be citizens thirty years of age by election day. They must meet all the conditions prescribed in the Senate election law and those prescribed in Article 32. (1) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the House of Representatives more than two years prior to the end of the term, an election will be held within three months to choose a replacement. (2) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the Senate, the election of the replacement will be held concurrently with the next regular election of one-half of the Senate.

ARTICLE 34

ARTICLE 35

ARTICLE 36

Procedures and conditions for the candidacies and election of Representatives and Senators, including ethnic minority representatives, will be prescribed by law.

GUARANTEE FOR REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATORS* (1) Representatives or Senators cannot be prosecuted, pursued, arrested or judged for any statement or vote in the National Assembly. (2) During their entire term of office, Representatives and Senators cannot be prosecuted, pursued, arrested or judged without the approval of three-fourths of the total number of Representatives or Senators, except in cases of flagrante delicto. (3) In cases of flagrante delicto prosecution or detention of Representatives and Senators will cease if the house concerned so requests. (4) Representatives and Senators have the right to keep secret the origin of documents presented to the National Assembly. (5) Representatives and Senators cannot cumulate any other officially appointed or elected position. (6) Representatives and Senators may teach at universities and advanced technical schools. (7) Representatives and Senators and their spouses cannot participate in bids or sign contracts with government agencies. * Editor's Addition.

ARTICLE 37

5

(1) In cases of treason or other serious crimes, Representatives or Senators may be removed from office by the house concerned. (2) Removal from office must be proposed by two-thirds of the total number of Representatives or Senators. (3) The resolution to remove a member from office must be approved by threequarters of the total number of Representatives or Senators. (4) The Representative or Senator concerned has the right to defend himself in debate during all phases of the removal procedure. AUTHORITY OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY*

ARTICLE 38

ARTICLE 39

ARTICLE 40

The National Assembly has the authority to: (1) Vote legislation; (2) Ratify treaties and international agreements; (3) Determine declarations of war and holding of peace talks. (4) Determine declarations of a state of war; (5) Control the government in the carrying out of national policy; (6) Within the framework of each house, pass on the validation of the election of Representatives or Senators.

(1) The National Assembly has the right to recommend the replacement of part or all of the government by a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives and Senators. (2) The recommendation is binding unless the President has special reasons for rejecting it. (3) In the event of rejection by the President, the National Assembly has the right to vote final approval of the recommendation by a three-quarters majority vote of the total number of Representatives and Senators. This recommendation by the National Assembly is binding from the day it is voted. LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES* (1) Representatives and Senators have the right to introduce projects of legislation. (2) The President may introduce drafts of legislation. (3) Projects and drafts of legislation referred to as bills, must be submitted to the office of the House of Representatives. (4) Whether the House of Representatives approves or rejects a bill, it must transmit the bill to the office of the Senate within three full days.

ARTICLE 42

The Senate has the right to open investigations regarding the execution of national policy and to request government agencies to produce documents necessary to its investigations.

ARTICLE 41

(1) Each house, with the agreement of one-third of its membership, has the right to request the Prime Minister or government officials to appear before it to answer questions regarding the execution of national policy. (2) Committee chairmen in each house have the right to request government officials to participate in the sessions of their committee to report on problems relating to the ministry concerned.

ARTICLE 43

6

(1) The draft budget is submitted to the office of the House of Representatives prior to September 30. (2) Representatives and Senators have the right to propose additional expenditures but must at the same time propose equivalent new receipts. (3) The House of Representatives must vote on the budget prior to November 30 and transmit the approved version to the office of the Senate by December 1 at the latest. (4) The Senate must vote on the draft budget before December 31. (5) During the abovementioned period, if the Senate requests the House of Representatives to reconsider one or more provisions of the draft budget, then the procedures outlined in Article 43 must be applied. In the event that the draft budget has not been finally voted by December 31, the President has the right to sign a decree-law authorizing expenditure of parts of the budget equivalent to one-twelfth of the previous budget until such time when the House of Representatives has voted final approval of the draft budget. REGULATIONS*

ARTICLE 46

(1) Within the period allowed for promulgation the President has the right to send a message giving his reasons for requesting the National Assembly to reconsider one or more articles of the bill. (2) In this case, the National Assembly will meet in joint plenary session to vote a final decision on the bill with a majority of more than one half of the total number of Representatives and Senators. If the National Assembly votes to reject the request for amendment by the President, the bill will automatically become law and will be transmitted to the President for promulgation.

ARTICLE 45

(1) Bills approved by the National Assembly will be transmitted to the President within three full days. (2) The President must promulgate the law within 15 full days from the date of receipt. (3) If the National Assembly appraises the matter as urgent, the bill must be promulgated within seven full days. (4) If the President does not promulgate the bill within the specified period of time the bill will automatically become law and will be promulgated by the President of the Senate.

ARTICLE 44

(5) If the Senate agrees with the viewpoint of the House of Representatives the bill will be transmitted to the President for promulgation or will be rejected. (6) If the Senate does not agree with the viewpoint of the House of Representatives it must return the bill to the House of Representatives within three full days along with its decision and an explanation for its action. (7) In the latter case, the House of Representatives has the right to vote final approval of the bill with a two-thirds majority of its total membership. (8) If the House of Representatives is unable to reach a two-thirds majority, the viewpoint of the Senate will be considered as approved. (9) The time limit for debating and voting on a bill in the Senate may not exceed half the time required to debate and vote on the bill in the House of Representatives. The time limit for debating and voting on a bill in the House of Representatives may not exceed twice the time required to debate and vote on the bill in the Senate.

ARTICLE 47

(1) Each house will meet in regular and extraordinary sessions. (2) Every year each house will meet in two regular sessions: One session be-

7

ARTICLE 48

ginning on the first Monday of April, and the other beginning on the first Monday of October. A session cannot last for more than ninety days. However, the House of Representatives can prolong its session in order to vote final approval of the draft budget. (3) Either house may meet in extraordinary sessions either at the request of the President of the Republic or of three-quarters of the total number of Deputies or Senators. If the extraordinary session is convened upon the request of the President, the President will set the agenda.

ARTICLE 49

(1) Each house will meet in open session except when more than half the members present in the house request a closed session. (2) In open sessions verbatim reports of the debate and documents presented at the National Assembly will be printed in the official journal.

(1) The President of the Senate will convene and preside over joint plenary sessions of both houses. (2) If the President of the Senate is unable to perform this function, it will be carried out by the President of the House of Representatives. CHAPTER IV: THE EXECUTIVE

ARTICLE 50

(1) Each house will elect its President and permanent officers. (2) Each house will establish permanent committees and special committees. (3) Each house has full power to establish its own internal rules. (4) The officers of the two houses will determine procedures for maintaining liaison between the two houses.

ARTICLE 51

THE PRESIDENT*

ARTICLE 54

Citizens who fulfill the following conditions may run for President or VicePresident: (1) Have Vietnamese citizenship from day of birth, and continuous residence in Vietnam for at least ten years up to the date of the election. Time spent abroad on official assignment or in political exile is considered as residence in Vietnam; (2) Be 35 years of age as of election day; (3) Enjoy full rights of citizenship; (4) Have legal draft status; (5) Meet all other conditions set forth in the Presidential and Vice-Presidential election law.

ARTICLE 53

The President and Vice-President run together on one list and are elected at large through universal suffrage by direct and secret ballot. (2) The term of office of the President and Vice-President is four years. The President and Vice-President can be re-elected once. (3) The term of office of the President and Vice-President ends precisely at 12:00 noon on the last day of the forty-eighth month from the day they took office, and the term of the new President and Vice-President begins at that time. (4) The election of the new President and new Vice-President will be held on a Sunday, four weeks before the term of the incumbent President ends.

ARTICLE 52

Executive authority is vested by the people in the President.

(1) The Supreme Court will establish a list of candidates, will control the fairness of the election and will announce the result.

8

ARTICLE 55

(2) Candidates will receive equal means in the electoral campaign. (3) Procedures and conditions governing candidacies and election of the President and Vice-President will be prescribed by law.

ARTICLE 56

When assuming office, the President, witnessed by the Supreme Court and National Assembly, shall take the following oath before the nation: I solemnly swear before the Nation to protect the Fatherland, respect the Constitution, serve the interests of the country and the People, and to the best of my ability fulfill my duties as President of the Republic of Vietnam.

ARTICLE 57 ARTICLE 58

(1) The duties of the President and Vice-President may terminate prior to the end of their terms of office in the following circumstances: (a) Death; (b) Resignation; (c) Impeachment; (d) Serious and prolonged illness such that the incumbent can no longer carry out his duties. This disability must be confirmed by three-fourths of the total membership of the two houses of the National Assembly after medical examinations and counter-examinations. (2) In the event that the duties of the President are terminated more than one year prior to the end of his term of office, the Vice-President shall temporarily assume the Presidency for a period of three months in order to organize the election of a new President and new Vice-President for a new term of office. (3) In the event that the duties of the President are terminated within one year prior to the end of his term of office, the Vice-President shall assume the Presidency for the remainder of the term, except in cases of impeachment of the President. (4) If for any reason the Vice-President is unable to assume the Presidency, the President of the Senate shall assume the office for a period not to exceed three months in order to organize the election of a new President and new Vice-President for a new term of office. The President promulgates laws within the period determined in Article 44.

ARTICLE 59

(1) The President appoints the Prime Minister. Upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, the President appoints members of the government. (2) The President has the right to reorganize all or part of the government on his own initiative, or upon the recommendation of the National Assembly.

ARTICLE 60 ARTICLE 61

(1) The President appoints, with the approval of the Senate: (a) Chief of Diplomatic Missions; (b) Rectors of Universities. (2) The President represents the Nation in relations with foreign countries and receives the credentials of diplomatic envoys. (3) The President signs and, after ratification by the National Assembly, promulgates international treaties and agreements.

The President is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Vietnam.

ARTICLE 62

(1) The President shall bestow all decorations. (2) The President shall exert the right to grant amnesty, pardon and commutation of penalty to criminals. (1) The President shall determine national policy. (2) The President shall preside over the Council of Ministers.

9

ARTICLE 63 (1) The President shall communicate with the National Assembly by message. At each regular session, and whenever he deems it necessary, the President shall inform the National Assembly on the state of the nation and on the domestic and foreign policies of the government. (2) The Prime Minister and other government officials may participate in sessions of the National Assembly or its committees to present and explain matters relating to national policy and its execution. ARTICLE 64 (1) In special situations, the President may sign decree-laws declaring states of alert, curfew or emergency over part or all of the national territory. (2) The National Assembly must convene no later than twelve days after the date of promulgation of the decree-law in order to ratify, amend or reject it. (3) If the National Assembly rejects or amends the President's decree-law, the special situations which were decreed will end or be modified accordingly. ARTICLE 65 In a state of war, and when elections cannot be held, the President, with the approval of two-thirds of the total membership of the National Assembly, shall extend the terms of office of certain elected bodies and appoint some province chiefs. ARTICLE 66 (1) The Vice-President is Chairman of the Culture and Education Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Ethnic Minority Council. (2) The Vice-President cannot cumulate any other position in the government. ARTICLE 67 (1) The Prime Minister directs the government and the administrative agencies of the nation. (2) The Prime Minister is responsible before the President for carrying out national policy. ARTICLE 68 (1) The President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and members of the government cannot hold any position in the private sector, with or without remuneration. (2) Spouses of persons holding the above positions may under no circumstances participate in government bids or contracts. ARTICLE 69 (1) The National Security Council has the duty to: Study all matters relating to national defense; Propose measures appropriate to the maintenance of national security; Propose the declaration of states of alert, curfew, emergency or war; Propose declarations of war or the holding of peace talks. (2) The President is Chairman of the National Security Council. (3) A law shall prescribe the organization and operating procedures of the National Security Council. LOCAL ADMINISTRATION* ARTICLE 70 (1) The principle of local separation of power is recognized for legal regional entities such as Villages, Provinces, Cities and the Capital. (2) The organization and regulation of local administration shall be prescribed by law. ARTICLE 71 (1) Deliberative bodies and the heads of executive agencies of local administrative units will be popularly elected through universal suffrage by direct and secret ballot.

10

(2) At the village level, Village Chiefs may be elected by Village Councils from among Village Council members. ARTICLE 72 The heads of executive agencies of local administrative units are: Villages — Village Chief; Provinces — Province Chief; Cities — Mayor; Capital — Mayor. ARTICLE 73 The deliberative bodies of local administrative units are: Villages — Village Council; Provinces — Province Council; Cities — Municipal Council; Capital — Municipal Council. ARTICLE 74 The Government shall appoint two officials who have the responsibility to assist Mayors, Province Chiefs and Village Chiefs in administrative and security matters, as well as other administrative personnel. ARTICLE 75 Members of deliberative bodies and heads of executive agencies of local administrative units may be dismissed by the President if they violate the Constitution, laws of the nation, or national policy. CHAPTER V: THE JUDICIARY ARTICLE 76 (1) Independent judicial power is vested in the Supreme Court and is exercised by judges. (2) A law shall establish the organization and administration of the Judiciary. ARTICLE 77 Every court must be established by law with an element that judges and an element that prosecutes, both of which are professionally qualified. Courts must respect rights of defense. ARTICLE 78 (1) The responsibilities of Presiding Judges and Prosecuting Judges are clearly delineated, and the two are governed by separate regulations. (2) Presiding Judges make decisions according to their consciences and the law, under the control of the Supreme Court. (3) Prosecuting Judges monitor the application of the law in order to protect public order, under the control of the Ministry of Justice. ARTICLE 79 Presiding Judges can be relieved of their functions only in cases of mental and physical incapacity, conviction or violation of discipline. THE SUPREME COURT* ARTICLE 80 (1) The Supreme Court includes from nine to fifteen justices chosen by the National Assembly and appointed by the President from a list elected by the Association of Judges, the Association of Prosecutors and the Association of Lawyers. (2) Justices of the Supreme Court must be judges or lawyers who have served at least ten years in the Judiciary. (3) The term of office of Justices of the Supreme Court is six years. 11

(4) The numbers of electors of the Association of Judges, Association of Prosecutors and Association of Lawyers must be equal. (5) The organization and regulation of the Supreme Court will be prescribed by law. (1) The Supreme Court shall interpret the Constitution, decide on the constitutionality of all laws and decree laws, decide on the constitutionality and legality of decrees and administrative decisions. (2) The Supreme Court shall decide on the dissolution of a political party whose policy and activities oppose the republican form of government. (3) In these cases, the Supreme Court shall meet in plenary session. Representatives of the legislative and executive branches may participate in order to present their viewpoints. (4) Decisions declaring the unconstitutionality of a law or the dissolution of a political party require a three-fourths vote of the total number of Supreme Court justices.

ARTICLE 81

ARTICLE 82

ARTICLE 83 ARTICLE 84

The Supreme Court shall decide on appeals from lower courts.

The Supreme Court has a separate budget and is empowered to establish regulations governing the Judiciary.

(1) The Judicial Council has the following responsibilities: To propose the appointment, promotion, transfer and disciplining of presiding judges; To advise the Supreme Court in matters relating to the Judiciary. (2) The Judicial Council shall be composed of presiding judges elected by the presiding judges. (3) The organization and regulation of the Judicial Council will be prescribed by law. CHAPTER VI: SPECIAL INSTITUTIONS SPECIAL COURT*

ARTICLE 85

ARTICLE 86 ARTICLE 87

The Special Court shall remove from office the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister, Ministers, Secretaries of State, Supreme Court Justices and members of the Inspectorate in cases of treason or other high crimes.

(1) The Special Court is chaired by the President of the Supreme Court and consists of five Representatives and five Senators.

(1) A motion to bring charges and citing reason therefor must be signed by more than one half of the total number of Representatives and Senators. The decision to bring charges must be approved by a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives and Senators. In the particular case of the President and Vice-President, the motion to bring charges must be signed by two-thirds of the total number of Representatives and Senators. The decision to bring charges must be approved by a majority vote of three-fourths of the total number of Representatives and Senators. (2) The functions of the accused shall be suspended from the date of approval of the decision to bring charges by the National Assembly until the decision of the Special Court is rendered.

12

(3 ) The Special Court shall decide removal from office by a three-fourths vote of its membership. In the particular case of the President and Vice-President, the decision must be made by a four-fifths vote of the total membership. (4) The accused shall enjoy the right of defense during the entire proceedings. (5) After having been removed from office, the accused may be tried by an ordinary court. (6) The organization, administration and procedures of the Special Court shall be prescribed by law. INSPECTORATE ARTICLE 88 The Inspectorate is empowered to: (1) Inspect, control and investigate personnel of all public and private agencies directly or indirectly engage in corruption, speculation, influence-peddling or acts harmful to the national interest; (2) Inspect accounts of public agencies and public corporations; (3) Audit the property of personnel of public agencies including the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister, National Assembly members, and the President of the Supreme Court. (4) In the cases of the Chairman and members of the Inspectorate, the audit of personal property will be conducted by the Supreme Court. ARTICLE 89 (1) The Inspectorate shall propose disciplinary measures against guilty persons or request prosecution by competent courts. (2) The Inspectorate shall announce publicly the results of its investigations. ARTICLE 90 (1) The Inspectorate includes from nine to eighteen Inspectors, one-third designated by the National Assembly, one-third by the President, and one-third by the Supreme Court. (2) Inspectors will enjoy those powers and guarantees necessary for them to carry out their duties. ARTICLE 91 (1) The Inspectorate has an autonomous budget and is empowered to establish regulations governing its internal organization and the Inspectorate branch. (2) The organization and regulation of the Inspectorate shall be prescribed by law. ARMED FORCES COUNCIL* ARTICLE 92 (1) The Armed Forces Council advises the President in matters relating to the Armed Forces, especially promotion, transfer and disciplining of military personnel of all ranks. (2) The organization and regulation of the Armed Forces Council shall be prescribed by law. CULTURE AND EDUCATION COUNCIL* ARTICLE 93 (1) The Culture and Education Council shall advise the government in the drafting and execution of cultural and educational policy. A National Academy shall be established. (2) With the approval of the National Assembly, the Culture and Education Council shall select representatives to brief the National Assembly on related matters. 13

(3 ) The Culture and Education Council may contribute ideas before the National Assembly debates laws relating to culture and education. ARTICLE 94 (1) The membership of the Culture and Education Council includes: One-third appointed by the President; Two-thirds designated by public and private cultural and educational organizations and by parent-teacher associations. (2) The term of office of the Culture and Education Council is four years. (3) The organization and regulations of the Culture and Education Council shall be prescribed by law. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL* ARTICLE 95 (1) The Economic and Social Council shall advise the government in economic and social matters. (2) With the approval of the National Assembly, the Economic and Social Council shall select representatives to brief the National Assembly on related matters. (3) The Economic and Social Council shall contribute ideas before draft laws and economic and social programs are debated. ARTICLE 96 (1) The membership of the Economic and Social Council includes: One-third appointed by the President; Two-thirds designated by industrial and trade organizations, and by labor unions and associations having an economic and social character. (2) The term of office of the Economic and Social Council is four years. (3) The organization and regulation of the Economic and Social Council shall be prescribed by law. ETHNIC COUNCIL* ARTICLE 97 (1) The Ethnic Council, representing the ethnic minorities living on the territory of Vietnam, shall advise the government in matters affecting ethnic minorities. (2) With the approval of the National Assembly, the Ethnic Council shall select representatives to brief the National Assembly on related matters. (3) The Ethnic Council shall contribute ideas before draft laws, programs and plans affecting ethnic minorities are debated. ARTICLE 98 (1) The membership of the Ethnic Council includes: One-third appointed by the President; Two-thirds designated by the ethnic minorities. (2) The term of office of the Ethnic Council is four years. (3) The organization and regulations of the Ethnic Council shall be prescribed by law. CHAPTER VII: POLITICAL PARTIES AND OPPOSITION ARTICLE 99 (1) The Nation recognizes that political parties have an essential role in a democratic system.

14

(2) Political parties may be organized and may operate freely, according to procedures and conditions prescribed by law. ARTICLE 100 The nation encourages progress toward a two-party system. ARTICLE 101 The Nation recognizes the formalization of political opposition. ARTICLE 102 Regulations governing political parties and political opposition shall be prescribed by law. CHAPTER VIII: AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION ARTICLE 103 (1) The President or an absolute majority of the total number of Representatives or an absolute majority of the total number of Senators has the right to propose amendments to the Constitution. (2) The proposal must cite reasons, and must be submitted to the Office of the Senate. ARTICLE 104 A Joint Committee will be established to study the proposed amendment and report to joint plenary sessions of the Assembly. ARTICLE 105 The resolution to amend the Constitution must be approved by two-thirds of the total number of Representatives and Senators. ARTICLE 106 The President promulgates a law amending the Constitution according to the procedures prescribed in Article 44. ARTICLE 107 Article 1 of the Constitution and this article may not be amended or deleted. CHAPTER IX: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 108 The Constitution takes effect from the date it is promulgated, and the Provisional Charter of June 19, 1965, is automatically invalidated. ARTICLE 109 During the transitional period, the National Assembly popularly elected on September 11, 1966, shall represent the people of the nation in the legislative sphere, and shall: (1) Draft and approve: Election laws for the election of the President and Vice-President, Senate and House of Representatives; Laws organizing the Supreme Court and the Inspectorate; Political party and press regulations. (2) Ratify treaties. ARTICLE 110 From the time the first President and Vice-President take office, the Assembly popularly elected on September 11, 1966, assumes legislative powers until the first National Legislative Assembly is convened. ARTICLE 111 During the transitional period, the National Directory and the Cabinet shall continue in power until the first President and Vice-President take office.

15

ARTICLE 112 During the transitional period, Courts presently in operation will continue to exercise judicial authority until the judicial organs prescribed in this Constitution are established. ARTICLE 113 The Assembly elected on September 11, 1966, shall establish a list of candidates, shall control the property and shall announce the result of the election of the first President and Vice-President. ARTICLE 114 During the first Presidential term, the President shall appoint province chiefs. ARTICLE 115 The election of the President and Vice-President shall be organized no later than six months from the date of promulgation of this Constitution. ARTICLE 116 The election of the National Assembly and the organization of the Supreme Court and Inspectorate shall be carried out no later than twelve months from the date the first President assumes office. ARTICLE 117 The other structures prescribed by the Constitution shall be established no later than two years from the date the first National Assembly is established.

16

