CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

RUMANIA
by GISBERT H. FLANZ

Issued May 1972

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1972 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ROMANIA

CONSTITUTION
OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ROMANIA

CHAPTER I

THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ROMANIA ART. 1. — Romania is a socialist republic. The Socialist Republic of Romania is a sovereign, independent and unitary state of the working people of the towns and villages. Its territory is inalienable and indivisible. ART. 2. — The whole power in the Socialist Republic of Romania belongs to the people, free and masters of their destiny. People's power is based on the worker-peasant alliance. In close union, the working class — the leading class of society — the peasantry, the intelligentsia and the other categories of working people, regardless of nationality, build the socialist system, creating the conditions for transition to communism. ART. 3. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania, the leading political force of the whole of society is the Romanian Communist Party. ART. 4. — The sovereign holder of power, the people exercise this power through the Grand National Assembly and the People's Councils, bodies elected by universal, equal, direct and secret vote. 3

The Grand National Assembly and the People's Councils are the basis of the whole system of state bodies. The Grand National Assembly is the supreme body of state power, under whose conduct and control all the other state bodies carry on their activities. ART. 5. — The national eoonomy of Romania is a socialist economy, based on the socialist ownership of the means of production. In the Socialist Republic of Romania, man's exploitation by man has been abolished for ever and the socialist principle of distribution according to the quantity and quality of work is implemented. Work is a duty of honour for each citizen of the country. ART. 6. — Socialist ownership of the means of production is either state property — goods belonging to the whole people, or cooperative property — goods belonging to each cooperative organization. ART. 7. — The wealth of the subsoil, whatever its nature, the mines, the state land, the forests, waters, sources of natural power, the factories and mills, the banks, the state farms, the machine-andtractor stations, the means of communication, the state means of transport and telecommunication, the state buildings and dwellings, the material basis of state socio-cultural institutions belong to the whole people and are state property. ART. 8. — Foreign trade is a state monopoly. ART. 9. — The land of the agricultural production cooperatives, the animals, implements, installations and buildings belonging to them are cooperative property. 4

The plot of land which according to the Rules of the agricultural production cooperatives is being used by the family household of the cooperative farmers, is cooperative property. The dwelling and the ancillary farm buildings, the land on which they stand and, according to the Rules of the agricultural production cooperatives, the production livestock and small agricultural dead stock are the personal property of the cooperative farmers. The tools, machines, installations and constructions of the handicraft cooperatives and of the consumer cooperatives are cooperative property. ART. 10. — The agricultural production cooperatives, a socialist form of agricultural organization, secure the conditions for the intensive cultivation of the land and the application of advanced science and contribute, by increasing output, to the development of the national economy, to the continuous raising of the living standard of the peasantry and of the whole people. The state gives support to the agricultural production cooperatives and protects their property. The state also gives support to the other cooperative organizations and protects their property. ART. 11. — In the conditions of cooperativized agriculture, the state guarantees to the peasants who cannot associate themselves in agricultural production cooperatives, ownership of the land which they themselves and their families are working, of the implements used in this work as well as ownership of the animals they use for work and for production. 5

The handicraftsmen are also guaranteed ownership of their own workshops. ART. 12. — Land and buildings can be expropriated only for work of public interest and on payment of an equitable compensation. ART. 13. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania the whole of state activity has as its purpose the development of the socialist system and the prosperity of the nation, the continuous growth of the people's living standard and cultural level, the ensurance of the freedom and dignity of man, the manysided affirmation of the human person. For this purpose, the Romanian socialist state : organizes, plans and conducts the national economy ; defends the socialist property ; guarantees the full exercise of citizen rights, assures socialist legality and defends the rule of law ; develops education at all levels, ensures the conditions for the development of science, the arts and culture, carries out public health protection ; ensures defence of the country and organizes its armed forces ; organizes relations with other states. ART. 14. — The Socialist Republic of Romania maintains and develops relations of friendship and fraternal collaboration with the socialist countries, in the spirit of socialist internationalism, promotes relations of collaboration with countries having other socio-political systems, activates in international organizations with a view to ensuring peace and understanding among the peoples. 6

The foreign relations of the Socialist Republic of Romania are based on the principles of observance of sovereignty and national independence, equal rights and mutual advantage, non-interference in internal affairs. ART. 15. — The territory of the Socialist Republic of Romania is organized in territorial-administrative units : counties, towns, and communes. The capital of the Socialist Republic of Romania is Bucharest Municipality organized in districts. The main towns may be organized as municipalities. ART. 16. — The Romanian citizenship is acquired and lost according to the law.

CHAPTER 11

THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE CITIZENS
ART. 17. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Rumania, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, have equal rights in all fields of economic, political, juridical, social and cultural life. The state guarantees the equal rights of the citizens. No restriction of these rights and no difference in their exercise on the grounds of nationality, race, sex or religion are permitted. Any expression aiming to establish such restrictions, nationalist-chauvinist propaganda, the fanning of racial or national hatred are punished by the law. 7

ART. 18. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania, the citizens have the right to work. Each citizen is given the possibility to carry on, according to his training, an activity in the economic, administrative, social or cultural field and is remunerated according to its quantity and quality. For equal work there is equal pay. The law establishes the measures for the protection and safety of labour as well as special measures for the protection of the work of women and young people. ART. 19. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania have the right to leisure. The right to leisure is guaranteed to those who work by the establishment of the maximum duration of the working day at eight hours, of weekly rest and of annual paid holidays. In the sectors of arduous and very arduous work, the working day is reduced to less than eight hours without any reduction in pay. ART. 20. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania have the right to material security in case of old age, sickness or incapacity to work. The right to material security is implemented for factory and office workers through pensions and sickness benefits paid by the state social insurance system, and for the members of the cooperative organizations or of other public organizations through the forms of insurance organized by these organizations. The state ensures medical assistance through its health units. Paid maternity leave is guaranteed. ART. 21. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania have the right to education.

8

The right to education is ensured by compulsory general education, by the fact that education at all levels is free and by the system of state scholarships. Education in the Socialist Republic of Romania is state education. ART. 22. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania the co-inhabiting nationalities are ensured the free utilization of their native language as well as books, papers, magazines, theatres and education at all levels in their own language. In territorial-administrative units also inhabited by a population of non-Romanian nationality, all the bodies and institutions use the language of the respective nationality in speech and in writing and appoint officials from its ranks or from the ranks other citizens who know the language and way of life of the local population.

a

ART. 23. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania women have equal rights with men. The state protects marriage and the family and defends the interests of mother and child. ART. 24. — The Socialist Republic of Romania ensures to young people the conditions required for the development of their physical and intellectual aptitudes. ART. 25. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania have the right to elect and to be elected to the Grand National Assembly and the People's Councils. The vote is universal, equal, direct and secret. All citizens who have reached the age of 18 years have the right to vote. Citizens with the right to vote who have reached the age of 23 years can be elected as deputies to the 9

Grand National Assembly and to the People's Councils. The right to nominate candidates is ensured to all organizations of the working people : the organizations of the Romanian Communist Party, the tradeunions, the cooperatives, the youth and women's organizations, the cultural associations and other mass and public organizations. The electors have the right to recall their deputy at any time, according to the same procedure under which he has been nominated and elected. Mentally alienated and deficient people have no right to elect and to be elected, also persons deprived of these rights during the period laid down by a court of law in its sentence. ART. 26. — The most advanced and conscious citizens from the ranks of the workers, peasants, intellectuals and other categories of working people unite in the Romanian Communist Party, the highest form of organization of the working class, its vanguard detachment. The Romanian Communist Party expresses and loyally serves the aspirations and vital interests of the people, implements the role of leader in all the fields of socialist construction, and directs the activity of the mass and public organizations and of the state bodies. ART. 27. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania have the right to associate themselves in trade-union, cooperative, youth, women's and socio-cultural organizations, in creative unions, scientific, technical, sports associations and other public organizations. 10

The state gives support to the activity of the mass and public organizations, creates conditions for the development of the material basis of these organizations and defends their property. The mass and public organizations ensure the large participation of the mass of the people in the political, economic, social and cultural life of the Socialist Republic of Romania and in the exercise of public control — an expression of the democratic spirit of the socialist system. Through the mass and public organizations the Romanian Communist Party achieves an organized link with the working class, the peasantry, the intelligentsia and the other categories of working people, mobilizes them in the struggle for the completion of the building of socialism. ART. 28. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania are guaranteed freedom of speech, of the Press, of reunion, of meeting and demonstration. ART. 29. — The freedom of speech, of the Press, reunion, meeting and demonstration cannot be used for aims hostile to the socialist system and to the interests of the working people. Any association of a fascist or anti-democratic character is prohibited. Participation in such associations and propaganda of a fascist or anti-democratic character are punished by the law. ART. 30. — Freedom of conscience is guaranteed to all the citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania. Anybody is free to share or not to share a religious belief. The freedom of exercising a religious cult is guaranteed, The religious cults organize and 11

function freely. The way of organization and functioning of the religious cults is regulated by law. The school is separated from the Church. No religious confession, congregation or community can open or maintain any other teaching establishments than special schools for the training of servants of the Church. ART. 31. — The citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania are guaranteed inviolability of the person. No person can be detained or arrested if there are no well-grounded proofs or indications that he has committed a deed listed and punished by the law, The organs of inquiry can order the detention of a person for a maximum of 24 hours. No one can be arrested except on the basis of an order of arrest issued by a court or the Procurator. The right to defence is guaranteed throughout the lawsuit. ART. 32. — The domicile is inviolable. No one can enter the dwelling of a person without the latter's consent, except in the cases and conditions specially laid down by the law. ART. 33. — The secret of correspondence and of telephone conversations is guaranteed. ART. 34. — The right to petition is guaranteed. The state bodies have the obligation to resolve the petitions of the citizens concerning personal or public rights and interests. ART. 35. — Those harmed in a right of theirs by an illegal act of a state body can ask the competent bodies, in the conditions provided by the law, to annul the act and repair the damage, 12

ART. 36. — The right to personal property is protected by the law. Objects of the right to personal property can be inoome and savings derived from work, the dwelling house, the household around it and the land on which they stand, as well as the goods of personal use and comfort. ART. 37. — The right to inheritance is protected by the law. ART. 38. — The Socialist Republic of Romania grants the right of refuge to foreign citizens persecuted for their activity in defence of the interests of the working people, for their participation in the fight for national liberation or in defence of peace. ART. 39. — Every citizen of the Socialist Republic of Romania is bound to respect the Constitution and the laws, to defend socialist property, to contribute to the strengthening and development of the socialist system. ART. 40. — Military servioe in the ranks of the Armed Forces of the Socialist Republic of Romania is compulsory and is a duty of honour of the citizens of the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 41. — To defend the homeland is the sacred duty of each citizen of the Socialist Republic of Romania. Violation of the military oath, treason to the homeland, desertion to the enemy, prejudice to the defensive capacity of the state are the greatest crimes against the people and are punished by the law with the utmost severity.

CHAPTER III THE SUPREME BODIES OF STATE POWER THE GRAND NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ART. 42. — The Grand National Assembly, the supreme body of state power, is the sole legislative body of the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 43, — The Grand National Assembly has the following main attributions : (1) it adopts and amends the Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Romania ; (2) it regulates the electoral system ; (3) it adopts the State Plan of the National Economy, the State Budget and the general final account of the budgetary exercise ; (4) it organizes the Council of Ministers, the mistate administries, and the other central bodies nistration ; (5) it regulates the organization of courts and the Procurator's Office ; (6) it establishes the norms for the organization and functioning of the people's councils ; (7) it establishes the administrative organization of the territory ; (8) it grants amnesty : (9) it ratifies and denounces international treaties that imply modification of laws ; (10) it elects and recalls the State Council ; (11) it elects and recalls the Council of Ministers ; (12) it elects and recalls the Supreme Court and the Procurator General ;

a

14

(13) it exercises general control of the application of the Constitution. It is only the Grand National Assembly that decides on the constitutionality of the laws ; (14) it controls the activity of the State Council ; (15) it controls the activity of the Council of Ministers, of the ministries and of the other central bodies of state administration ; (16) it hears reports on the activity of the Supreme Court and controls its directive decisions ; (17) it controls the activity of the Procurator's Office ; (18) it exercises general control of the activity of the People's Councils ; (19) it establishes the general line of foreign policy ; (20) it proclaims, in the interest of the country's defence, of public order or state security, the state of urgency in some localities, or throughout the country's territory ; (21) it orders partial or general mobilization ; (22) it declares the state of war. The state of war can be declared only in case of armed aggression directed against the Socialist Republic of Romania or against another state towards which the Socialist Republic of Romania has mutual defence obligations arising from international treaties, if a situation has come about for which the obligation of declaring a state of war has been laid down ; (23) it appoints and recalls the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. ART. 44. — The deputies to the Grand National Assembly are elected in constituencies with the 15

same number of inhabitants. The constituencies are established by decrees of the State Council. One deputy is elected for every constituency. The Grand National Assembly is made up of 465 deputies. ART. 45. — The Grand National Assembly is elected for a term of four years, reckoned from the date the mandate of the previous Grand National Assembly has expired. The mandate of the Grand National Assembly cannot cease before the term it has been elected for has expired. In case it finds that there are circumstances which make impossible to hold elections, the Grand National Assembly can decide to prolong its mandate for the duration of these circumstances. ART. 46. — Elections to the Grand National Assembly are held on one non-working day in the last month of every legislature. The date of elections is established at least 60 days before. The newly-elected Grand National Assembly is convened during the three months following the expiration of the mandate of the previous Grand National Assembly. ART. 47. — The Grand National Assembly verifies the legality of the election of every deputy, deciding on the validation or annulment of his election. In the case of an annulled election, the rights and duties of the deputy cease from the moment of annulment. ART, 48. — The Grand National Assembly adopts its rules of functioning. ART. 49. — The Grand National Assembly esta16

blishes its annual budget which is included in the State Budget. ART. 50. — The Grand National Assembly elects, for the duration of the legislature, the Bureau of the Grand National Assembly, formed of the Chairman of the Grand National Assembly and four ViceChairmen. ART. 51. — The Chairman of the Grand National Assembly conducts the proceedings of the sessions of the Grand National Assembly. The Chairman of the Grand National Assembly can designate any one of the four Vice-Chairmen to fulfil some of his attributions. ART, 52. — The Grand National Assembly elects standing commissions formed of deputies. The standing commissions examine or debate at the request of the Grand National Assembly or of the State Council drafts of laws, of decrees, of decisions or of other acts that are to be adopted as well as any other problems. At the same time, at the request of the Grand National Assembly or of the State Council, each standing commission in keeping with its competence can hear informations — periodically or according to problems — presented by the leaders of any body of the state administration, of the Supreme Court and of the Procurator's Office on the activity of these bodies as well as reports of the chairmen of the Executive Committees of the People's Councils on the activity of these councils and analyse the way in which the above-mentioned bodies carry out the policy of the Romanian Communist Party and ensure the application of the law. The commissions draw up reports, opinions on 17

bills or proposals with regard to matters mentioned in paragraph 2 and 3 and submit them to the Grand National Assembly or to the State Council. The Grand National Assembly can elect temporary commissions for any problem or field of activity, establishing the authority and mode of activity for each of these commissions. All the state bodies and officials are obliged to put at the disposal of the commissions of the Grand National Assembly the requested information and documents. ART. 53. — In exercising control of the constitutionality of laws, the Grand National Assembly elects a Constitutional Commission for the duration of the legislature. Experts who are not deputies, can be elected to the Constitutional Commission ; their number must not exceed one-third of the total membership of the Commission. The Commission presents to the Grand National Assembly reports and opinions at its own initiative or at the intimation of the bodies provided for by the rules of the Grand National Assembly. At the request of the Bureau of the Grand National Assembly, the Constitutional Commission draws up and presents reports also on the drafts of bills. At the same time, at the request of the State Council, the Constitutional Commission draws up and presents the State Council reports on the drafts of decrees including norms with the power of law.

ART. 54. — The Grand National Assembly works
in sessions.

18

Ordinary sessions of the Grand National Assembly are convened twice a year. The Grand National Assembly is convened, whenever necessary, in special sessions, at the initiative of the State Council or of at least one-third of the total number of deputies. ART. 55. — The Grand National Assembly works only if at least one half plus one of the total number of deputies are present. ART. 56. — The Grand National Assembly adopts laws and decisions. The laws and decisions are adopted by a majority vote of the deputies to the Grand National Assembly. The Constitution is adopted and amended by the vote of at least two-thirds of the total number of deputies to the Grand National Assembly. The laws and decisions of the Grand National Assembly are signed by the Chairman or ViceChairman of the Grand National Assembly who conducted the meeting. ART. 57. — After their adoption by the Grand National Assembly, the laws are published in the Official Bulletin of the Socialist Republic of Romania within a maximum of ten days, signed by the President of the State Council. ART. 58. — Every deputy to the Grand National Assembly has the right to put questions and address interpellations to the Council of Ministers or to any of its members. Within the framework of the control exercised by the Grand National Assembly, a deputy can put questions and address interpellations to the presi19

dent of the Supreme Court and to the Procurator General. The person to whom a question or interpellation has been put is obliged to reply orally or in writing in a maximum of three days, and in any case during the same session. ART. 59. — In preparation of the discussions of the Grand National Assembly or of interpellations the deputy has the right to ask for the necessary mformation from any state body applying for this purpose to the Bureau of the Grand National Assembly. ART. 60. — Every deputy is obliged to periodically report to the electorate on his activity and on that of the Grand National Assembly. ART. 61. — No deputy to the Grand National Assembly can be detained, arrested or sent for trial without the previous consent of the Grand National Assembly during session and of the State Council between sessions. Only in case of flagrant infraction can a deputy be detained without this consent.

THE STATE COUNCIL ART. 62. — The State Council of the Socialist Republic of Romania is the supreme body of state power with a permanent activity ; it is subordinated to the Grand National Assembly. ART. 63. — The State Council permanently exercises the following main attributions : (1) it establishes the date of elections to the Grand National Assembly and People's Councils ; 20

(2) it appoints and recalls the heads of central bodies of state administration who are not on the Council of Ministers ; (3) it establishes the military ranks ; it grants the ranks of general, admiral and marshal ; (4) it institutes and confers decorations and honorary titles ; it authorizes the wearing of decorations conferred by other states ; (5) it grants pardon ; (6) it grants citizenship, approves renunciation of citizenship and withdraws the Romanian citizenship : (7) it grants the right of refuge ; (8) it ratifies and denounces international treaties with the exception of those whose ratification and denouncement is within the competence of the Grand National Assembly ; (9) it establishes the ranks of diplomatic missions, appoints and recalls diplomatic representatives of the Socialist Republic Romania ; (10) it receives letters of credence and of recall of diplomatic representatives of other states ; (11) in international relations the State Council, through its President, represents the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 64. — The State Council exercises, in the interval between the sessions of the Grand National Assembly, the following main attributions :

a

(1) it convenes the sessions of the Grand National Assembly ; (2) it establishes, without being able to change the Constitution, norms with the power of law. The norms with the power of law are tabled, at the first session, for discussion to the Grand National Assembly according to the procedure for the adop21

tion of laws. The State Plan of the National Economy, the State Budget as well as the general final account of the budgetary exercise can be adopted by the State Council only when the Grand National Assembly cannot meet due to exceptional circumstances ; (3) it appoints and recalls the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Court and the Procurator General if the Grand National Assembly cannot meet because of exceptional circumstances ; (4) it appoints and recalls the members of the Council of Ministers at the proposal of its Chairman ; (5) it appoints and recalls the President and members of the Supreme Court ; (6) it gives the laws in farce a general and compulsory interpretation ; (7) it grants amnesty ; (8) it controls the application of laws and decisions of the Grand National Assembly, the activity of the Council of Ministers, of the ministries and of the other central bodies of state administration as well as the activity of the Procurator's Office ; it listens to the reports of the Supreme Court and controls its directive decisions ; it controls the decisions of the people's councils ; (9) in the interest of defending the Socialist Republic of Romania, of ensuring public order or state security, it proclaims in case of emergency, in some localities or throughout the country's territory, the state of urgency ; (10) it orders, in case of emergency, partial or general mobilization ; (II) it declares, in case of emergency, the state of 22

war. The state of war can be declared only in the event of armed aggression directed against the Socialist Republic of Romania or against another state towards which the Socialist Republic of Romania has mutual defence obligations, arising from international treaties, if a situation has come about for which the obligation of declaring a state of war has been laid down ; (12) it appoints and recalls the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. ART. 65. — The State Council is elected by the Grand National Assembly from among its members for the duration of the legislature in its first session. The State Council functions up to the election of the new State Council in the following legislature. ART. 66. — The State Council is formed of the President of the State Council, four Vice-Presidents and twenty-two members. The State Council elects a secretary from among its members. ART. 67. — The State Council carries on its activity according to the principle of collective leadership. ART. 68. — The State Council issues decrees and adopts decisions. The decrees and decisions are signed by the President of the State Council. The decrees with the power of law are published in the Official Bulletin of the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 69. — The State Council reports to the Grand National Assembly on the exercise of its attribution, as well as on the observance and execution in state activity of the laws and decisions of the Grand National Assembly. 23

The State Council as a whole and every one of its members are responsible to the Grand National Assembly for the entire activity of the State Council.

CHAPTER IV

THE CENTRAL BODIES OF STATE ADMINISTRATION
ART. 70. — The Council of Ministers is the supreme body of state administration. The Council of Ministers exercises the general conduct of the executive activity for the whole territory of the country and has the following main attributions : (1) it establishes general measures for the implementation of the home and foreign policy ; (2) it decides upon necessary measures with a view to organizing and ensuring the application of laws ; (3) it guides, co-ordinates and controls the activity of the ministries and of the other central bodies of state administration ; (4) it works out the draft of the State Plan and the draft State Budget, as well as other draft bills ; it works out draft decrees ; (5) it establishes measures for the implementation of the State Plan and the State Budget ; it draws up the general report on the implementation of the State Plan and the general final account of the budgetary exercise ; 24

(6) it sets up enterprises, economic organizations and state institutions of national interest ; (7) it takes measures with a view to ensuring public order, defending the interests of the state and protecting the rights of the citizens ; (8) it takes measures according to the decisions of the Defence Council, for the general organization of the Armed Forces and for establishing the annual contingents of citizens to be called up for military service ; (9) it exercises the general conduct in relations with other states and takes measures for the conclusion of international agreements ; (10) it supports the activity of the mass and public organizations ; (II) it exercises the conduct, direction and general control of the activity of the Executive Committees of all People's Councils. ART. 71. — The Council of Ministers is elected by the Grand National Assembly for the duration of the legislature in its first session. The Council of Ministers functions up to the election of the new Council of Ministers in the following legislature. ART. 72. — In the fulfilment of its attributions, the Council of Ministers adopts decisions on the basis and in view of .the application of the laws. The decisions of a normative character are published in the Official Bulletin of the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 73. — The Council of Ministers is formed of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the First Vice-Chairman and of the Vice-Chairmen of the Council of Ministers, ministers as well as heads of 25

other central bodies of state administration provided for by law. Members of the Council of Ministers are also appointed as ministers : the Chairman of the Central Council of the General Confederation of TradeUnions, the Chairman of the National Union of the Production Agricultural Cooperatives as well as the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Union of Communist Youth. The Chairman, the First Vice-Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen of the Council of Ministers form the Permanent Bureau of the Council of Ministers. ART. 74. — The Council of Ministers carries on its activity according to the principle of collective leadership, ensuring the unity of political and administrative action of the ministries and of the other central bodies of state administration. ART. 75. — The Council of Ministers as a whole and everyone of its members is responsible to the Grand National Assembly and in the interval between sessions to the State Council. Every member of the Council of Ministers is answerable both for his own activity and for the entire activity of the Council of Ministers. ART. 76. — The ministries and the other central bodies of state administration implement the state policy in the branches or fields of activity for which they have been set up. They manage, guide and control the enterprises, economic organizations and state institutions subordinated to them. ART. 77. — The ministers and the heads of the other central bodies of state administration issue, on 26

the basis and in view of applying the laws and the decisions of the Council of Ministers, instructions and orders as well as other acts provided for by law; their acts of a normative character are published in the Official Bulletin of the Socialist Republic of Romania. ART. 78. — The ministers and the other heads of central bodies of state administration are responsible to the Council of Ministers for the activity of the body which they lead.

CHAPTER V THE LOCAL BODIES OF STATE POWER AND THE LOCAL BODIES OF STATE ADMINISTRATION ART. 79. — The People's Councils are the local bodies of state power in the territorial-administrative units in which they have been elected. The People's Councils conduct the local activity, securing the socio-cultural and administrative development of the territorial-administrative units in which they have been elected, the defence of socialist property, the protection of the citizen rights, socialist legality and the maintaining of public order. The People's Councils organize the participation of the citizens in the solution of state and public affairs on the local level. ART, 80. — The People's Council exercises the following main attributions : 27

(1) it adopts the local budget and economic plan, approves the final account of the budgetary exercise ; (2) it elects and recalls the Executive Committee of the People's Council ; (3) it establishes enterprises, economic organizations and state institutions of local interest ; (4) it conducts, directs and controls the activity of its Executive Committee, of the specialized sections of state administration, of the subordinated enterprises, economic organizations and institutions; (5) it controls the decisions of hierarchically inferior People's Councils. (6) it elects and revokes according to laws, the judges, the people's jurors and the Procurator General of the counties or of the Bucharest Municipality. ART. 81. — The People's Councils are formed of deputies elected by the constituencies, one deputy being elected for each constituency. The constituencies formed for the election of the deputies to a People's Council have the same number of inhabitants. The mandate of the People's Council is of four years, except that of the village People's Council which is of two years. The mandate is reckoned from the date of the end of the mandate of the preceding People's Council. The new elections are held on the one of the nonworking days during the last month of the mandate of the People's Council. ART. 82. — The People's Councils elect from among the deputies standing commissions which help them in the fulfilment of their tasks. 28

ART. 83. — The People's Councils work in sessions ; the convening of sessions is made by the Executive Committee of the People's Council. The People's Councils are called in special sessions whenever necessary at the initiative of the Executive Committee or at the demand of at least one-third of the total number of deputies. ART. 84. — The People's Councils work in the presence of at least one half plus one member of the total number of deputies. ART. 85. — Each deputy is obliged to periodically present to the electorate reports on his activity and on that of the People's Council to which he has been elected. ART. 86. — The People's Councils adopt decisions. A decision is adopted if it receives the vote of the majority of the People's Council deputies. Decisions of a normative character are communicated to the citizens in the forms provided for by the law. ART. 87. — The Executive Committee of the People's Council is the local body of state administration with general competence in the territorialadministrative unit in which the People's Council has been elected. ART. 88. — The Executive Committee of the People's Council has the following principal attributions : (1) it carries out the laws, decrees and decisions of the Council of Ministers and the other acts of the superior bodies ; (2) it applies the decisions of the People's Council which has elected it ;
29

(3) it works out the drafts of the economic plan and the local budget ; (4) it carries out the economic plan and the local budget, draws up the report on the implementation of the local economic plan as well as the final account of the budgetary exercise ; (5) it conducts, directs and controls the activity of the specialized local bodies of the state administration ; (6) it conducts, directs, coordinates and controls the activity of the subordinated economic organizations, enterprises and institutions ; (7) it conducts, directs and controls the activity of the Executive Committees of the People's Councils which are hierarchically inferior to the People's Council which has elected it ; In the interval between the sessions of the People's Councils the Executive Committee fulfils the attributions of the People's Councils excepting those mentioned under Article 80 — paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 and submits for approval the adopted decisions to the People's Council at its first session. ART. 89. — The members of the Executive Committee are elected by the People's Council from among its deputies at the first session after the elections far the duration of the mandate of the People's Council. After the expiry of the mandate of the People's Council the Executive Committee continues to function up to the election of the new Executive Committee. ART. 90. — The Executive Committee of the People's Council is formed of a Chairman, Vice-

30

Chairmen of whom one may be first Vice-Chairman and a number of members established by the law. ART. 91. — In the exercise of its attributions, the Executive Committee of the People's Council issues decisions on the basis of and with a view to the implementation of the law. Decisions of a normative character are communicated to the citizens in the forms provided for by the law. ART. 92. — The Executive Committee carries on its activity acceding to the principle of collective leadership. The Executive Committee in its totality and each of its members are responsible for their activity to the People's Council which has elected them, as well as to the Executive Committee of the hierarchically superior People's Council and to the Council of Ministers. Each member of the Executive Committee is responsible for his own activity as weal as for the whole activity of the body the member of which he is. ART. 93. — The People's Councils organize in keeping with the laws attached to their Executive Committees, local specialized bodies of the state administration. The local specialized bodies of the state administration are subordinated to the People's Council and the Executive Committee as well as to the hierarchically superior local and central bodies of state administration.

CHAPTER VI THE COURTS

ART. 94. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania the law is administered by the Supreme Court, regional courts, people's courts and by military courts established according to the law. ART. 95. — By their judiciary activity, the courts defend the socialist system and the rights of persons, educating the citizens in the spirit of respect for the law. In applying penal sanctions, the courts aim to reform and re-educate infractors and to prevent the commission of new infractions. ART. 96. — The courts try civil, penal and any other cases in their competence. In the cases provided for by the law, the courts exercise control over the decisions of administrative or public bodies having a jurisdictional activity. The courts try the demands of those harmed in their rights by administrative acts and can, in the conditions provided for by the law, also give their views on the legality at these acts. ART. 97. — The Supreme Court exercises general control over the judicial activity of all the courts. The way of exercising this control is established by law. With a view to the uniform application of the laws in judicial activity, the Supreme Court, in its plenum, issues decisions of direction. ART. 98. — The Supreme Court is elected by the 32

Grand National Assembly for the duration of the legislature in its first session. The Supreme Court functions up to the election of the new Supreme Court in the following legislature. ART. 99. — The Supreme Court is responsible for its activity to the Grand National Assembly, and between sessions to the State Council. ART. 100. — The organisation of the courts, their competence and judicial procedure are established by law. Cases in the first instance at the people's courts, the county courts and the military courts are fried with the participation of people's jurors, unless otherwise provided for by law. ART. 101. — Judges and people's jurors are elected in accordance with the procedure established by law. ART. 102. — In the Socialist Republic of Romania judicial procedure is in the Romanian language and, in the territorial-administrative units inhabited also by a population of another nationality than Romanian, the use of the mother tongue of that population is assured. The parties who do not speak the language in which the trial is held, are given the possibility of becoming acquainted through an interpreter with the files and the right to speak in court and to sum up in the mother tongue. ART. 103. — Trials are held in public sessions, unless otherwise provided for by law. 33

ART. 104. — In their judicial activity the judges and the people's jurors are independent and only subject to the law.

CHAPTER VII

THE ORGANS OF THE PROCURATOR'S OFFICE
ART. 105. — The Procurator's Office of the Socialist Republic of Romania exercises the supervision of the activity of the penal prosecution organs and the courts and watches in keeping with the law, over the observance of the law, over the defence of the socialist order, of the legitimate interests and rights of the socialist organizations, of other juristic persons as well as of citizens. ART. 106. — The Procurator's Office is conducted by the Procurator General. The organs of the Procurator's Office are the Procurator General's Office, the Procurator's county, local offices and the Procurator's military office. The organs of the Procurator's Office are hierarchically subordinated. ART. 107. — The Procurator General is elected by the Grand National Assembly for the duration of the legislature in its first session and functions up to the election of the new Procurator General in the first session of the following legislature. The Procurators are appointed in keeping with the 34

law, excepting those mentioned in Article 80. paragraph 6. ART. 108. — The Procurator General is responsible to the Grand National Assembly for the activity of the Procurator's Office, and between sessions to the State Council.

CHAPTER VIII THE INSIGNIA OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ROMANIA ART. 109. — The emblem of the Socialist Republic of Romania represents wooded mountains over which the sun is rising. In the left part of the emblem there is an oil derrick. The emblem is surrounded by a wreath of wheat ears. The emblem is surmounted by a five-pointed star. At the base of the emblem the sheaves are bound with a tricolour ribbon bearing the words "Republica Socialista Romania." ART. 110. — The State Seal bears the country's emblem, around which are the words "R E P UBLICA SOCIALISTA ROMANIA." ART. 111. — The flag of the Socialist Republic of Romania bears the colours red, yellow and blue, placed vertically, with the blue stripe next to the flagstaff. The emblem of the Socialist Republic of Romania is placed in the centre. ART. 112. — The Anthem of the Socialist Republic of Romania is approved by the Grand National Assembly. 35

CHAPTER IX FINAL PROVISIONS

ART. 113. — The present Constitution comes into force on the date of its adoption. ART. 114. — The Constitution of September 24, 1952 and any provisions of laws, decrees and other normative acts that are contrary to the provisions of the present Constitution are abrogated on the same date.

