Constitutions of the Communist Party-States
JAN F. TRISKA

Edited by

The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace Stanford University

The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, founded at Stanford University in 1919 by the late President Herbert Hoover, is a center for advanced study and research on public and international affairs in the twentieth century. The views expressed in its publications are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Hoover Institution.

Hoover Institution Publications

[r]

1968 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University All rights reserved Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 67-29975 Printed by Cathay Press, Hong Kong

CONSTITUTION OF THE RUMANIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
September 24, 19521 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER
THE RumanianPeople's Republic is a state of the working people fromtown and village.

The Rumanian People's Republic came into being as a result of the historic victory of the Soviet Union over German fascism and of the liberation of Rumania by the glorious Soviet army ; this liberation enabled the working people—with the working class led by the Communist Party at the helm—to fell the fascist dictatorship, to destroy the power of the exploiting classes, and to create a state [regime] of people's democracy which corresponds fully with the interests and aspirations of the popular masses of Rumania. In this way it was possible to crown with an historic victory the century-long struggle carried on by the Rumanian people for freedom and independence—the heroic battles of the working class allied with the working peasantry for the felling of the capitalist landlord regime and the shaking off of the imperialist yoke. The creation and strengthening of the state of people's democracy, the friendship and alliance with the great Soviet Union, and its brotherly support and assistance, guarantee the independence, state sovereignty, development and prosperity of the Rumanian People's Republic. The military forces of the Rumanian People's Republic stand guard over the boundaries of the country, the sovereignty and independence of the Rumanian people, their security and peace. The foreign policy of the Rumanian People's Republic is a policy of defense of peace, of friendship and alliance with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the countries of people's democracy, and a policy of peace and friendship with all peace-loving people. The national minorities of the Rumanian People's Republic enjoy full equality in rights with the Rumanian people. In the Rumanian People's Republic, territorial administrative autonomy is insured to the Hungarian population of the Szekler districts, where it forms a compact mass. The present Constitution of the Rumanian People's Republic reflects the results already obtained by the working people, led by the working class, in the enterprise of building a socialist society in our country. The policy of the state of people's democracy is directed toward liquidation of exploitation of man by man and toward the building of socialism.

CHAPTER I

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM
The Rumanian People's Republic is a state of working people from town and village.
ARTICLE I. ARTICLE 2.

The foundation of popular power in the Rumanian People's Republic is the alliance of the working class with the working peasantry, in which the leading role belongs to the working class.

The Rumanian People's Republic was born and strengthened as a result of the country's liberation from the yoke of fascism and imperialist domination by the armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics—and as a result of the felling of the power of the landlords and of the capitalists by the popular masses from town and village—led by the working class with the Rumanian Communist Party at its helm.
ARTICLE 3.

In the Rumanian People's Republic power belongs to the working people from town and village, who exercise it through the Great National Assembly and the people's councils. The people's councils constitute the political foundation of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 4.

The national economy of the Rumanian People's Republic comprises three social-economic sectors: the socialist sector, the sectors of small-scale commodity production, and the private capitalist sector.
ARTICLE 5.

The foundation of the social-economic socialist sector is the socialist ownership of the means of production, either in the form of state property (asset of the whole people), or in the form of cooperative collective property (property of collective farms or of cooperative organizations). In the socialist sector of the national economy, exploitation of man by man has been liquidated. The socialist sector, to which belongs the leading role in the national economy of the Rumanian People's Republic, is the foundation for development of the country along the socialist road. The state of people's democracy, proclaiming the building of socialism as its principal task, continually strengthens and broadens this socialist sector, insuring the continual growth of the material well-being and cultural level of the working people. All wealth of the subsoil, the factories, plants and mines, the forests, the waters, the sources of natural energy, all ways of communication, means of transportation by rail, river, sea and air, the banks, post, telegraphs, telephone, radio, means of printing, cinemas and theater, the state farms, the machine and tractor stations, and communal enterprises, as well as the nationalized part of the fund of dwelling houses in towns, are state property and are an asset of the whole nation.
ARTICLE 7. ARTICLE 8.

ARTICLE 6.

The land of the People's Republic of Rumania belongs to those who

work it.

ARTICLE 9. The animate and inanimate inventory of the collective farms and

cooperatives, their output as well as all their enterprises and buildings, are the communal property of the collective farms and of the cooperatives. The peasant members of the collective farms hold for personal use a plot of land next to their dwellings and, as their personal property, the husbandry on that plot, a dwelling house, productive animals, poultry, and small agricultural implements—this in accordance with the collective farm statute.2
ARTICLE IO. The small-scale production of commodities in the Rumanian People's

Republic includes small and medium-size farms of peasants holding the land in private on the basis of the producers' own labor, as well as the workshops of the craftsmen and handicraftsmen who do not exploit the work of others. The state protects on the basis of the laws in force the right to private ownership of the land of peasants with small and medium-size farms. The people's democratic state supports the peasants with small and medium-size farms, as well as the craftsmen and handicraftsmen, with the aims of protecting them from capitalist exploitation, increasing their production, and raising their well -b eing.
ARTICLE II. The private capitalist formation in the Rumanian People's Republic

includes wealthy [kulak] farms, private commercial enterprises, and the small non-nationalized industrial enterprises based on the exploitation of wage labor. The people's democratic state systematically follows a policy of isolating and eliminating the capitalist elements.
ARTICLE 12. The rights of the citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic to

private property, to incomes and savings originating from work, to a dwelling house and auxiliary husbandry around the house, to household objects and items of personal use, as well as to inheritance of personal property, are protected by law.
ARTICLE 13. The economic and cultural life of the Rumanian People's Republic

develops on the basis of the state plan for the national economy, in the interests of building socialism, continually raising the material and cultural well-being of the working people, and strengthening the independence and defensive capacity of the country.
ARTICLE 14. In the Rumanian People's Republic foreign commerce is a monopoly

of the state.
ARTICLE 15. In the Rumanian People's Republic work is a duty and a question of

honor for every citizen able to work, this according to the principle he who does not work shall not eat. In the Rumanian People's Republic the principle of socialism —from each according to his abilities, to each according to his work—is being realized on an ever widening scale.

CHAPTER II

THE STATE SYSTEM
ARTICLE I 6. The state system of the Rumanian People's Republic is one of people's

democracy, which represents the power of the working people.
ARTICLE 17. The Rumanian people's democratic state, a unitary, sovereign and

independent state: (a) Defends the independence and sovereignty of the Rumanian people; the gains which the working people of town and village have achieved; the rights, freedoms and power of the laboring man against the enemies of the working people;

(b) Ensures the strengthening and development of the productive forces of the country through socialist industrialization, through liquidation of economic, technical and cultural backwardness and through gradual socialist transformation of agriculture on the basis of the free consent of the working peasant; (c) (d) (e) (f) Organizes and develops the planned economy on the basis of state and cooperative enterprises; Organizes the defense of the republic from foreign enemies and leads the armed forces of the country; Ensures the internal security of the citizens, and renders harmless and represses the enemies of the people; Directs the monetary and credit system, and elaborates and realizes the state budget; determines taxes, levies and other revenues necessary to cover the needs of the state;

(g) Administers the banks, as well as the industrial, agricultural and commercial state enterprises and institutions; (h) (i) (j) (k) Directs public education at all levels; Ensures the steady growth of the health and well-being of the masses of people from town and village; Ensures the development of culture—socialist in content, nationalist in form—of the Rumanian people and of the national minorities; Oversees the application and observance of the Constitution and laws of the Rumanian People's Republic, these being the expression of the will and of the interests of the working people.

The Constitution and the laws of the land prevail over the whole territory of the republic, and consequently their exact observance and application is the principal duty of every state institution and of every citizen.
ARTICLE 18. The administrative-territorial division of the Rumanian People's

Republic is as follows:

The regions of Arad, Bacàu, Baia Mare, Barlad, Brasov, Bucharest, Cluj, Constanta, Craiova, Galati, Hunedoara, Iasi, Oradea, Pite§ti, Ploe§ti, Stalin, Suceava, Timi§oara, and the Autonomous Hungarian Region. The Autonomous Hungarian Region of the Rumanian People's Republic is defined by the territory occupied by the compact Hungarian Szekely population and has an autonomous administration elected by the population of the autonomous region. The Autonomous Hungarian Region includes the districts of Ciuc, Gheorgheni, Odorhei, Reghin, Sangeorgiu de Padure, Sft. Gheorghe, Targu-Mures, TarguSacuesc, Toplita. The administrative center of the Hungarian Autonomous Region is the town of Targu-Mures. ARTICLE 20. The laws of the Rumanian People's Republic, as well as the decisions and directives of the central organs of the state, are obligatory on the territory of the Autonomous Hungarian Region. ARTICLE 21. The statute of the Hungarian Autonomous Region is drawn up by the people's council of the autonomous region and submitted for approval to the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic.
CHAPTER III
ARTICLE 19.

THE SUPREME ORGAN OF STATE POWER OF THE RUMANIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
ARTICLE 22.

The supreme organ of state power of the Rumanian People's Republic is the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic.

ARTICLE 23.

The Great National Assembly is the sole legislative organ of the Rumanian People's Republic. ARTICLE 24. The direct competence of the Great National Assembly includes: (a) Election of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic; (b) Formation of the Government of the Rumanian People's Republic; (c) Modification of the Constitution; (d) Decision upon questions of war and peace; (e) Determination of plans for the national economy; (f) Approval of the state budget, and of the report on fulfillment of the state budget, and determination of taxes and revenues designated for the state budget; (g) Determination of the number and names of ministries, as well as the fusion and abolition of ministries; (h) Modification of the regional divisions of the Rumanian People's Republic;

(i) (j)

Granting of amnesty; General control over application of the Constitution.

ARTICLE 25.

The Great National Assembly is elected by workers, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, on the basis of electoral districts providing one deputy for every 40,000 of population. The Great National Assembly is elected for a four-year term. A law is considered adopted if it is passed by a simple majority of the Great National Assembly.
ARTICLE 27. ARTICLE 26.

Laws adopted by the Great National Assembly are then signed by the President and Secretary of the Presidium and published in the official bulletin of the Great National Assembly. Observance of laws adopted by the Great National Assembly is obligatory for all citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 28.

Sessions of the Great National Assembly are held twice a year. The Great National Assembly is convened by its Presidium. The Great National Assembly may be convened in extraordinary session by its Presidium or on demand of one-third of the total number of deputies. The Great National Assembly elects for each of its sessions a president and two vice presidents who conduct the meetings according to the internal rules of procedure. The Great National Assembly validates the mandates of its elected deputies. In order to verify the circumstances under which each deputy was elected, the Great National Assembly [appoints a] commission of validation. This commission submits its report for approval to the Great National Assembly, which then validates or nullifies the election of every deputy.
ARTICLE 32.

ARTICLE 29. ARTICLE 3o.

ARTICLE 31.

The Great National Assembly may name commissions of inquiry and investigation into various problems. All authorities and state employees have the obligation to put at the disposition of these commissions the necessary information and documents. The Great National Assembly determines the powers and mode of functioning of every individual commission.

ARTICLE 33. Every deputy has the right to direct questions, or to interpellate the government or any individual minister. The government or the minister to whom the question was directed has the obligation to answer, verbally or in writing, within three days. ARTICLE 34.

No deputy may be brought to court or arrested without permission of the Great National Assembly during the sessions, or of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly during the recesses.

ARTICLE 35.

The Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic elects its [own] Presidium, consisting of a president, two vice presidents, one secretary and thirteen members.

ARTICLE 36.

The Presidium of the Great National Assembly is responsible for all its activity to the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic.

ARTICLE 37.

The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic has the following competences : (a) To convene sessions of the Great National Assembly; (b) To issue decrees; (c) To interpret the laws in force in the Rumanian People's Republic; (d) To decide on the holding of a national consultation (referendum); (e) To set aside the decisions and dispositions of the Council of Ministers in case these contravene the laws; (f) In the interval between the sessions of the Great National Assembly, to release and name ministers of the Government on the recommendation of the President of the Council of Ministers, subject to subsequent approval by the Great National Assembly; (g) To institute decorations, medals and honorific titles of the Rumanian People's Republic; (h) To confer decorations, medals and honorific titles of the Rumanian People's Republic; to establish military and diplomatic ranks and other special titles; (i) In the interval between the sessions of the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic, to declare, on the recommendation of the Government, the state of war in case of an armed aggression directed against the Rumanian People's Republic or against another state toward which the Rumanian People's Republic has mutual defense obligations arising from international treaties ; To name and to recall the supreme commander of the armed forces of the Rumanian People's Republic; (k) To declare a state of partial or general mobilization; (j)

(1) To exercise the right of pardon and commutation of punishments
[sentences] ; (m) To ratify and to denounce international treaties of the Rumanian People's Republic; (n) To accredit and to recall plenipotentiary representatives of the Rumanian People's Republic in foreign countries; (o) To accept letters of accreditation and recall of diplomatic representatives of foreign countries accredited to the Presidium; (p) In the interest of the defense of the Rumanian People's Republic or of the securing of public order and security of the state, to proclaim a state of emergency in certain localities or on the entire territory of the country.
ARTICLE 38.

The authority of the Great National Assembly ceases with the expiration of the term for which it was elected.

ARTICLE 39. After the expiration of the mandate of the Great National Assembly

of the Rumanian People's Republic, the Presidium of the Great National Assembly orders new elections within a maximum period of three months from the day of the expiration of the mandate of the Great National Assembly. The Presidium in office retains its powers until the election of a new Presidium by the new Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 40. In case of war or other exceptional circumstances, the Great Natic nal Assembly can prolong its mandate for the duration of the state of emergency. ARTICLE 41. The newly elected Great National Assembly is convoked by the

Presidium in office within a maximum period of three months after the elections.

CHAPTER IV

THE ORGANS OF STATE ADMINISTRATION OF THE RUMANIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
ARTICLE 42. The supreme executive and administrative organ of state power of the

Rumanian People's Republic is the Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 43. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the Great National Assem-

bly of the Rumanian People's Republic and consists of: The president of the Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic; The vice presidents of the Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic; The president of the State Planning Committee; The president of the State Control Commission; The ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic; The president of the State Committee on the Stocking of Agricultural Products; The president of the State Committee for Architecture and Construction.
ARTICLE 44. The Council of Ministers is responsible to and accounts for its

activities before the Great National Assembly and before the Presidium of the Great National Assembly in the intervals between the sessions of the Great National Assembly.
ARTICLE 45. The Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic issues

decisions and dispositions on the basis of laws in force and with the view of carrying them into effect, and it controls their execution.
ARTICLE 46. The application of the decisions and dispositions of the Council of

Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic is obligatory throughout the territory of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 47. The Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic has

the following competences :

(a) To coordinate and guide the activities of the ministries and of the other subordinate institutions; (b) To take measures for the realization of the national economic plan, of the state budget, and for the consolidation of the monetary and credit system; (c) To take measures with view of assuring public order, the defense of state interests and protection of the rights of citizens; (d) To exercise overall direction in the domain of relations with foreign states; (e) To establish the annual contingents of citizens to be called for the fulfillment of active military service; and to direct the general organization of the country's armed forces; (f) To establish according to need special committees and commissions as well as general administrative departments attached to the Council of Ministers for economic, cultural, juridical and military affairs. The Council of Ministers of the Rumanian People's Republic can annul orders and instructions of ministers which do not conform to laws and decisions of the Council of Ministers.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 48.

49. Within the limits of the jurisdiction of the ministries they direct, the ministers give orders and instructions on the basis of, and with view of executing the laws in force and the decisions and dispositions of the Council of Ministers, and they exercise control over their application.
ARTICLE 5o.

The ministries of the Rumanian People's Republic are the following:

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs; The Ministry of Internal Affairs; The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry; The Ministry of Railways; The Ministry of Foreign Trade; The Ministry of Internal Trade; The Ministry of Construction and of the Building Materials Industry; The Ministry of Religions; The Ministry of Culture; The Ministry of Electrical Energy and Electro-technical Industry; The Ministry of Finance; The Ministry of Armed Forces; The Ministry of Communal Economy and Local Industry; The Ministry of Food Industry; The Ministry of Coal Industry; The Ministry of Chemical Industry; The Ministry of Metallurgical and Machine Building Industry; The Ministry of Oil Industry; The Ministry of Forest, Paper and Cellulose Industry;

The Ministry of Light Industry; The Ministry of Public Education; The Ministry of Justice; The Ministry of Post and Telecommunication; The Ministry of Social Insurance; The Ministry of Health; The Ministry of Water and Air Transport.
CHAPTER V

THE ORGANS OF LOCAL STATE POWER
The organs of state power in the regions, districts, towns, and rural localities are the people's councils of the working people from towns and villages.
ARTICLE 51.

The people's councils consist of deputies elected for a two-year term by the working men, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic from the given region, district, town and rural locality. The quota of representation in the People's Councils is established by law.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE 52.

53. The people's councils guide the work of the administrative organs subordinate to them, direct the local economic and cultural activities, assure the maintenance of public order as well as observance of laws and protection of the rights of citizens, and draw up the local budget. 54. The people's councils organize the active participation of the working people in the management of state and social affairs and in the building of socialism.

ARTICLE

The people's councils take decisions and issue dispositions within the limits of the jurisdiction granted them by the laws of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 5 5 .

The executive and administrative organs of the people's councils on the regional, district, town and rural level are executive committees elected by the people's councils and consisting of president, vice president, a secretary, and members.
ARTICLE 5 6 . ARTICLE 57.

The organ of state power of the Hungarian Autonomous Region is the people's council of the region. The executive organ of the people's council of the Autonomous Hungarian Region is the executive committee elected by it.

The people's council of the Hungarian Autonomous Region is elected, according to the norms established by law, for a two-year term by the working people of the Hungarian Autonomous Region, citizens of the Rumanian Peoples Republic.
ARTICLE 59.

ARTICLE 58.

The executive and administrative organ of the people's councils in small communities is composed of the president, vice president, and a secretary, elected by the deputies of the respective people's council.

The executive and administrative organs of the people's councils give account of their activities to the people's council which has elected them, as well as to the executive committee of the immediately superior [higher] people's council. ARTICLE 61. The people's councils of regions, districts and towns organize sections of the executive committees. The organization, mode of functioning, and activities of the sections is determined by law. ARTICLE 62. The sections of the executive committees of the people's councils are subordinated to their respective people's council and executive committee as well as to corresponding sections of the executive committee of the immediately superior people's council and to the respective ministries. ARTICLE 63. After the expiration of the mandate of the people's councils, the executive committees retain their competences until new executive organs are formed by the newly elected people's councils.
CHAPTER VI

ARTICLE 6o.

THE JUDICIAL INSTITUTIONS AND THE PROCURATOR'S OFFICE
ARTICLE 64.

Justice is administered in the Rumanian People's Republic by the Supreme Court of the Rumanian People's Republic, the regional courts and the people's courts, as well as by special courts as established by law. The organization, competences and procedure of the courts are established by law. ARTICLE 65. The courts defend the regime [system] of people's democracy and the gains of the working people; they secure rule of law for the people, public property and the rights of the citizens. ARTICLE 66. Except when law provides otherwise, people's assessors participate in the trials at all court levels. ARTICLE 67. The Supreme Court of the Rumanian People's Republic is elected by the Great National Assembly for a term of five years. The judges and people's assessors are elected in conformance with the procedure established by law. The manner of appointment of judges of special courts is also established by law. ARTICLE 68. The judicial procedure is conducted in the Rumanian People's Republic in the Rumanian language; in regions and districts inhabited by a population of a different nationality from the Rumanian, the use of the mother tongue of that population is ensured. Parties who do not speak the language in which the judicial process is conducted are assured of the possibility of acquainting themselves, through a translator, with the documentary evidence, and of speaking in court and presenting conclusions in their mother tongue.

ARTICLE

69. Except for cases foreseen by law, the judicial procedure at all courts is public. The accused is guaranteed the right of defense. The judges are independent and subject only to the law. The judges pronounce the verdicts in the name of the people.

ARTICLE 7o.

ARTICLE 71. ARTICLE 72. ARTICLE 73.

The Supreme Court of the Rumanian People's Republic supervises the judiciary activities of all courts in the Rumanian People's Republic. The Procurator General of the Rumanian People's Republic exercises higher supervision over the observance of laws by ministries and other central organs of the state, and by local organs of state power and administration as well as by state functionaries and other citizens. The Procurator General of the Rumanian People's Republic is appointed by the Great National Assembly for a term of five years. The deputies [substitutes] of the Procurator General of the Rumanian People's Republic and the procurator of the local units of the Procurator's Office are appointed by the Procurator General for a term of four years.
ARTICLE 75. ARTICLE 74.

The Procurator General is responsible to the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic, and—in the intervals between the sessions— before the Presidium of the Great National Assembly and before the Council of Ministers.
ARTICLE 76.

The organs of the Procurator's Office are independent from the local organs and subordinate themselves only to the Procurator General of the Rumanian People's Republic. CHAPTER VII

THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CITIZENS
The citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic are assured of the right to work, that is the right to obtain guaranteed work paid according to its quantity and quality. The right to work is ensured through the existence and development of the socialist sector of the national economy, through uninterrupted and systematic growth of the productive forces of the Rumanian People's Republic, through the elimination of the possibility of economic crises, and through the elimination of unemployment.
ARTICLE 78. ARTICLE 77.

The citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic have the right to rest. The right to rest is ensured through establishment of an eight-hour work day for workers and office employees; reduction of the work day to less than eight hours in certain professions in which working conditions are arduous and in certain sectors in which these conditions are especially arduous; establishment of paid yearly vacations for workers and office employees; putting at the disposal of working men rest homes, sanatoria and cultural institutions.

The citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic have the right to material security in old age and in case of sickness or employment disability. This right is guaranteed by a broad development of social insurance of workers and office employees financed at the state expense, by free medical assistance extended to those who work, and by putting at the disposal of the working people spas and climatic [health] resorts. 80. The citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic have the right to education. This right is ensured through universal, compulsory and free elementary education; through a system of state scholarships extended to deserving students and pupils of the higher, secondary and elementary educational system [establishment]; through organization on the part of industrial enterprises, state farms, machine and tractor stations, and collective farms of free vocational instruction for those who work [for them]. Education of all levels is state education. The state concerns itself with the development of science, literature and art.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 81. The working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, without distinction of nationality, race or sex, are assured of full equality of rights in all domains of economic, political and cultural life. Any direct or indirect restriction of the rights of the working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, or establishment of direct or indirect privileges on the basis of race or nationality to which citizens belong, or any manifestation of chauvinism, race or national hatred as well as chauvinist nationalistic propaganda, is punishable by law. ARTICLE 82.

ARTICLE 79.

In the Rumanian People's Republic the national minorities are ensured the free use of the mother tongue, as well as education at all levels, books, newspapers and theaters in the mother tongue. In all constituencies inhabited by a nationality other than Rumanian, all the authorities and institutions will use, in word and in writing, also the language of the respective nationality and will appoint functionaries from the ranks of the respective nationality or from among other local people who are familiar with both the language and way of life of the local population. The woman in the Rumanian People's Republic has equal rights with the man in all the domains of economic, political, state and cultural life. The woman has equal rights with the man to work, pay, rest, social insurance and education. The state protects marriage and family and the interests of the mother and child. The state grants aid to mothers with many children and those who are heads of households, and paid vacations to pregnant women; it organizes maternity homes, nurseries and children's homes.
ARTICLE 84. ARTICLE 83.

The freedom of conscience is guaranteed to all citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic. Religious cults are free to organize and function. The free exercise of religion is guaranteed to all citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic.

The school is separated from the church. No religious confession, congregation or community can open or maintain general educational institutions but only special schools for the training of [their] religious personnel. The mode of organization and functioning of religious confessions is regulated by law.
ARTICLE

85. In conformity with the interests of the working people and with view of strengthening the regime of people's democracy, the citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic are guaranteed by law: (a) Freedom of speech; (b) Freedom of the press; (c) Freedom of assembly and of [mass] meetings; (d) Freedom of street processions and demonstrations.

These rights are ensured by means of putting at the disposition of the working masses and their organizations printing presses, stocks of paper, public buildings, streets, and means of communication, as well as other material prerequisites necessary for the exercise of these rights. In conformity with the interests of those who work and for the purpose of developing the political and public activities of the popular masses, the citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic are ensured the right to form public organizations, professional unions, cooperative societies, women's and youth organizations, sports organizations, and cultural, technical and scientific associations. Any association with a fascist or antidemocratic character is prohibited. Participation in such associations is punished by law. The most active and conscious elements from the ranks of the working class and other strata of working people unite in the Rumanian Workers' Party, which is the vanguard of the workers in their struggle for the strengthening and development of the people's democratic system and the building of a socialist society. The Rumanian Workers' Party is the leading force of the organizations of the working people, as well as of the state organs and institutions. Around it unite together all the organizations of the working people in the Rumanian People's Republic. 87. The citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic are guaranteed inviolability of the person. No one can be arrested except on the basis of a decision of the court or of the procurator, conforming to the provisions of the law.
ARTICLE ARTICLE 88. ARTICLE 86.

Inviolability of the citizen's home and the secrecy of the mail are protected by law. 89. The Rumanian People's Republic grants the right of asylum to 1 foreign citizens persecuted for defending the interests of the working people, for scientific activity, or for participation in the struggle of national liberation or in defense of peace.
A RTICLE

It is the duty of every citizen of the Rumanian People's Republic to observe the Constitution and the laws of the state of people's democracy; to guard, strengthen and develop public socialist property; to observe labor discipline; actively to contribute to the strengthening of the regime of people's democracy and the flourishing of the country's economy and culture. ARTICLE 91. Military service is obligatory. Military service in the ranks of the armed forces of the Rumanian People's Republic is a duty of honor for the citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic. ARTICLE 92. To defend the fatherland is a sacred duty of every citizen of the Rumanian People's Republic. Betrayal of the fatherland, violation of the oath, going over to the side of the enemy, prejudicing the defensive capacity of the state, [and] espionage constitute the gravest crimes toward the people and state, and are punished by law with all severity.
CHAPTER VIII

ARTICLE 9o.

THE ELECTORAL SYSTEM
ARTICLE 93.

The elections of the deputies to the Great National Assembly and the people's councils take place by universal, equal, direct, and secret vote. ARTICLE 94. The right to participate in the election of deputies is vested in all the working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, who have reached the age of eighteen years, without distinction of race, nationality, sex, religion, level of culture, profession or length of domicile, with the exception of the insane, of persons deprived of electoral right by court sentence, and of those declared unworthy by law. Any working man, a citizen of the Rumanian People's Republic, who is in possession of the right to vote and has reached the age of twenty-three years, may be elected a deputy of the Great National Assembly. ARTICLE 95. All working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, take equal part in the elections, each having the right to one vote. ARTICLE 96. Women enjoy equal right with men to elect and to be elected to the Great National Assembly and to the People's Councils. ARTICLE 97. Citizens serving in the ranks of the armed forces of the Rumanian People's Republic have the right to elect and be elected on equal terms with all the working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic. ARTICLE 98. The election of deputies is [by] direct [suffrage]. The working people, citizens of the Rumanian People's Republic, participate by direct vote in the elections to the Great National Assembly and all the people's councils. ARTICLE 99. The election of deputies takes place by secret vote. ARTICLE MO. The registration of candidates for the election of deputies takes place by electoral districts, according to the norms established by law. The right to put forward candidates is ensured to all organizations of the working people: organizations of the Rumanian Workers' Party, trade unions, cooperatives, youth and other mass organizations, and cultural societies.

Every deputy is obliged to account to his electors for his activities and the activities of the elected body of which he is a member. The mandate of the deputy can be recalled at any time on the basis of a decision of the majority of the electors, in conformity to the procedure established by law.
ARTICLE I0I . CHAPTER IX

THE [COAT OF] ARMS, FLAG, AND CAPITAL OF THE RUMANIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
ARTICLE 102. The [coat of] arms of the Rumanian People's Republic represents forested mountains above which the sun rises. In the left [foreground] is an [oil] derrick. The [coat of] arms is framed by a wreath of wheat ears. In the upper part of the arms is a five-pointed star. In the bottom part, the ears of wheat are entwined with a tricolor ribbon on which are written the letters R.P.R.

The flag of the Rumanian People's Republic bears the colors red, yellow, and blue, arranged vertically with the blue next to the staff. In the middle [of the flag] is placed the [coat of] arms of the Rumanian People's Republic.
ARTICLE 103. ARTICLE 104.

The capital of the Rumanian People's Republic is Bucharest.
CHAPTER X

THE PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING THE CONSTITUTION OF THE RUMANIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
The Constitution of the Rumanian People's Republic can be amended only by law voted by the Great National Assembly. A bill amending the Constitution is considered adopted when at least two-thirds of the total membership of the Great National Assembly of the Rumanian People's Republic have voted for it.
ARTICLE 105.

