Title I
The People's Republic of Rumania Art. 1. The People's Republic of Rumania is a popular, unitary, independent, and sovereign state. Art. 2. The People's Republic of Rumania was created in the struggle waged by the people, headed by the working class, against fascism, reaction, and imperialism. Art. 3. In the People's Republic of Rumania, the whole power of the State is derived from the people and belongs to the people. The people exercise their power through representative bodies elected on the basis of universal, direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot. Art. 4. The people's representatives in all the bodies of state power are responsible to the people and are liable to be revoked upon the will of the electors in conditions established by law.

Title II
Social and Economic Structure Art. 5. In the People's Republic of Rumania, the means of production belong either to the State, being the possession of the whole people, or to co-operative organizations, or to private physical or juridical persons. Art. 6. All mineral resources, mines, forests, waters, sources of natural power, communication lines by rail, land, water, and sea, post, telegraph, telephone, and radio belong to the State, as common possessions of the people. The method of passing into the property of the State any of the resources specified in the preceding paragraph, which were in private hands on the day the present Constitution came into force, will be laid down in law. Art. 7. The common possessions of the people constitute the material basis of the economic progress and national independence of the People's Republic of Rumania. It is the duty of every citizen to defend and develop the common possessions of the people. Art. 8. Private property and the right of inheritance are acknowledged and guaranteed by law. Private property acquired through work and savings enjoys special protection.



Art. 9. The land belongs to those who work it. The State protects the working peasant's holdings. It encourages and gives support to village co-operation. In order to stimulate the improvement of agriculture, the State may create state-owned agricultural enterprises. Art. 10. Expropriations for reasons of public utility can be made in accordance with the law and under payment of rightful compensation as established by law. Art. 11. When required in the general interest, the means of production, banks, and insurance companies, which are the property of private physical or juridical persons, may become state property, i.e. the possession of the people, under conditions established by law. Art. 12. Work is the fundamental factor of the economic life of the State. It is the duty of every citizen. The State grants support to all working people in order to defend them against exploitation and to raise their standard of living. Art. 13. The State grants protection to private initiative which serves the general interest. Art. 14. The internal and foreign trade is regulated and controlled by the State and it is carried out through state, private and co-operative commercial enterprises. Art. 15. The State directs and plans the national economy in order to develop the economic power of the country, to ensure the welfare of the people, and to safeguard the national independence. Title III Fundamental Rights and Duties of the Citizens Art. 16. All citizens of the People's Republic of Rumania, irrespective of sex, nationality, race, religion, or educational qualifications are equal before the law. Art. 17. Any advocacy or manifestation of racial or national hatred is punishable by law. Art. 18. All citizens, irrespective of sex, nationality, race, religion, educational qualifications, profession, including servicemen, magistrates, and civil servants, have the right of electing and of being elected to all the organs of the State. All citizens who have reached the age of eighteen have the right to vote, and all citizens who have reached the age of twenty-three have the right to be elected. Disqualified persons, deprived of civil and political rights, if pronounced as such by the qualified authorities in accordance with the law, do not enjoy the right to vote. Art. 19. The citizens have the right to work. The State gradually insures this right by the planned organization and development of the national economy. Art. 20. The citizens have the right to leisure. This right to leisure is ensured by regulating working hours, by paid vacations, in accordance with the law, by organizing rest homes, sanatoriums, clubs, parks, sport grounds, and institutions especially designed for this purpose. Art. 21. Women are accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of public, economic, social, cultural, private-law, and political life.



For equal work women have the right to equal pay as men. Art. 22. In the People's Republic of Rumania all citizens have the right to education. The State ensures the achievement of this right by organizing and developing elementary education, compulsory and free of charge, by state scholarships granted to meritorious pupils and students, and by organizing and developing vocational and technical education. Art. 23. The State encourages and supports the development of science and art and organizes research institutes, libraries, printing houses, theaters, museums, and music academies. Art. 24. In the People's Republic of Rumania, the right of using their native language and of organizing education of every grade in their own language is ensured to all nationalities living in the country. Administrative and judicial authorities in the districts inhabited also by nationalities other than Rumanian will also use, orally and in writing, the language of the nationality concerned, and will appoint officials from the nationality concerned, or from another nationality who know the language of the local population. The teaching of the Rumanian language and literature is compulsory in schools of every grade. Art. 25. The State takes care of public health by creating and developing health services and by encouraging and protecting physical training. The State assures social protection and medical care in cases of sickness, accidents, and disablements resulting from or occurring at work, or in the defense services of the country, as well as maintenance in old age, both for civil servants and for employees of private enterprises, whose contribution and rights are established by law. Art. 26. Marriage and the family enjoy the protection of the State. Mothers and children under eighteen years of age enjoy special protection as established by law. The parents have the same duties toward children born out of wedlock as toward those born in wedlock. All acts affecting the civil status are only valid if contracted before the state authorities. Art. 27. Freedom of conscience and freedom of religious worship are guaranteed by the State. Religious creeds are free to organize themselves and can freely function provided their ritual and practice are not contrary to the Constitution, public security, or morality. No religious denomination, congregation, or community can open or maintain institutions of general education, but may only run special schools for training personnel necessary to the cult under state control. The Rumanian-Orthodox Church is autocephalous and unitary in its organization. The way of organizing and functioning of the religious creeds will be established by law. Art. 28. The individual liberty of the citizen is guaranteed. No person may be placed under arrest and imprisoned longer than forty-eight hours without a warrant of the public prosecutor, or of the examining magistrature as established by law, or under an authorization of the judicial authorities in accordance with the law.



Art. 29. The domicile is inviolable. No person may enter the home or residence of a citizen without his consent, except in his presence and on the basis of a written warrant from the appropriate authority, or in case of flagrante delicto. Art. 30. No person may be sentenced or detained to serve a sentence except under a judicial decision according to the law. Art. 31. Freedom of the press, of speech, of assembly, of mass meetings, of street processions, and demonstrations is guaranteed. The exercising of these rights is ensured by the fact that the means of printing, the paper, and meeting halls are placed at the disposal of the working people. Art. 32. The citizens have the right of association and organization, if the aims pursued are not directed against the democratic order established by the Constitution. Any association of fascist or anti-democratic character is forbidden and punishable by law. Art. 33. The secrecy of correspondence is guaranteed. Only in the case of court instruction, under martial law, or in case of mobilization, correspondence may be inspected. Art. 34. Every citizen has the right to petition, as well as the right to ask the legislature to bring suit against any civil servants for offenses committed in the exercise of duty. Art. 35. The People's Republic of Rumania grants the right of refuge to all foreigners persecuted for their democratic activities, for their struggle for national liberation, for their scientific or cultural activities. Art. 36. The defense of their country is a duty of honor for all citizens. Military service is obligatory for all citizens according to the law. High treason - violating the oath of allegiance, entering the service of the enemy, impairing the military power of the State - constitutes the gravest crime against the people and is punishable with all the severity of the law. Title IV The Supreme Organ of State Authority Art. 37. The supreme organ of state authority in the People's Republic of Rumania is the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 38. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is the only legislative body of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 39. Within the direct competence of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania fall: (1) The electing of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. (2) The forming of the government of the People's Republic of Rumania. (3) The amending of the Constitution. (4) The establishing of the number, attribution and appellation of ministries, and the abolishing, merging or giving new appellation to the existing ministries. (5) The voting of the State budget and of the closing of the budgetary year, the fixing of taxes and of the ways of their collection. (6) The questions of war and peace. (7) The decision to consult the people by referendum. (8) The granting of amnesty.

Art. 40. The Great National Assembly elects from its members the Presidium of the assembly. is elected by one-half plus one of the total number of The Presidium 1 deputies. Art. 41. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania consists of one president, three vice-presidents, one secretary, and fourteen members directly elected by the Great National Assembly. Art. 42. The Presidium as a whole, or any of its members, may be removed at any time by the Great National Assembly by a majority as laid down in Article 40. Art. 43. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is responsible for its whole activity to the Great National Assembly. Art. 44. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania has the following functions: (1) To summon the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania in ordinary and special sessions; (2) To issue decrees; (3) To enact the laws passed by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania; (4) To exercise the right of pardon and to commute punishments; (5) To confer the decorations and medals of the People's Republic of Rumania; (6) To represent the People's Republic of Rumania in international relations; (7) To appoint and recall, at the proposal of the government, the diplomatic representatives of the People's Republic of Rumania; (8) To receive the credentials and the letters of recall from the diplomatic representatives of foreign countries accredited to it; (9) To appoint and remove ministers on the recommendation of the Prime Minister during the intervals between the sessions of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania; (10) To establish military ranks, diplomatic ranks, and honorary titles on the recommendation of the government; (11) To make and sanction civil service appointments on recommendation of the ministers concerned or of the government, in accordance with the law; (12) To declare, in the interval between sessions of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania, on the recommendation of the government, a state of war and partial or general mobilization, in ease of aggression against the People's Republic of Rumania, or against another state toward which she has mutual defense obligations ensuing from international treaties; (13) To ratify or denounce international treaties on the recommendation of the government; (14) To settle any question submitted to it by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania and to carry out any functions which may be vested in it by law. Art. 45. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania takes valid decisions by simple majority of its members. Decrees will be signed by the president and the secretary of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of



Rumania. If they are prevented from signing, the president will be replaced by one of the vice-presidents, and the secretary by one of the members designated by the Presidium from its ranks. Art. 46. After the mandate of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania expires, or in case of its dissolution before term, the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania continues until the election of a new Presidium. Art. 47. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is elected for a period of four years. It is composed of representatives of the people (deputies), elected according to the procedure established by electoral law. Art. 48. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania meets in ordinary sessions at least twice a year, each session lasting until the end of the proceedings. The assembly is convened by decree of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 49. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania may be convened in extraordinary sessions by decree of the Presidium, at the request of not less than one-third of the deputies. Art. 50. After the validation of the deputies, the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania elects a bureau which will conduct the proceedings, consisting of one president, three vice-presidents, and secretaries. The bureau of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is elected for each session of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. The proceedings of the Great National Assembly will be presided over by the president, or by one of the vice-presidents, of the bureau, in accordance with the regulations drawn up by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 51. The presence of one-half plus one of the total number of deputies will constitute a quorum. Valid decisions will be taken by simple majority of deputies present, except in cases where the Constitution or the regulations of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania provide for a different number. Art. 52. Voting may be done by secret vote, by raising of hands, or by acclamation, according to the decision of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 53. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania declares the validity of the election of deputies. The vote of a deputy is valid even prior to the examination of the validity of his mandate. Art. 54. Deputies whose mandate has been declared valid take the following oath to the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania: "I swear to serve the people and the People's Republic of Rumania with all my devotion and capacity to work, to defend and respect the Constitution and the laws of the country; to keep state secrets and defend the interests of the people and the State, the democratic liberties and the independence of the country." The same oath will be taken by members of the Presidium and the members of the government on taking up office. Art. 55. The legislative initiative belongs to the government. Not less than one-fifth of the total number of deputies may also introduce legislation.



Art. 56. The laws, after having been voted by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania, are signed by the president and secretary of the Presidium, and are published in the official monitor. A law comes into effect on the day indicated in the text, or three days after its publication in the official monitor. Art. 57. The sessions of the Great National Assembly are public, except in cases where the assembly decides to hold secret sessions. Art. 58. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania has the right to investigate and inquire into any sphere of the People's Republic of Rumania, by means of commissions elected from its ranks. All state authorities and organs, as well as private persons, are bound to give every information and to put at the disposal of such commissions any document required by them. Art. 59. No deputy can be detained, arrested, or prosecuted without the consent of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania during the sessions, or of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania between sessions, for any offense, except in cases of flagrante delicto and in such cases the authorization of the Great National Assembly or of the Presidium must be obtained forthwith. Art. 60. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is considered dissolved on the expiration of the mandate on which it was elected. The Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania can dissolve before this date. Art. 61. In case of war or in other exceptional circumstances, the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania can prolong its mandate for the duration of the exceptional situation. Art. 62. In case war breaks out, or another exceptional circumstance arises, during the time when the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania is dissolved, the Presidium of the dissolved Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania will convene it again, and the assembly thus convened may prolong its mandate in accordance with Article 61. Art. 63. Elections for a new Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania must be held not later than three months after dissolution. Art. 64. Deputies receive a salary fixed by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 65. Every deputy has the right of addressing questions or interpellating the government or each of the ministers. The Prime Minister or the minister thus questioned or interpellated must reply at the same sitting or at another, fixed by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Title V The Organs of State Administration: The Council of Ministers and the Ministries Art. 66. The highest executive and administrative organ in the People's Republic of Rumania is the government.



The government consists of the president of the council of ministers (Prime Minister), one or more vice-presidents and ministers, who together form the council of ministers. Art. 67. The ministries and their functions are determined by the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania in accordance with Article 39, paragraph 4. Art. 68. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania, on the recommendation of the council of ministers, may appoint assistant ministers for any ministry. Art. 69. The government is responsible and accountable to the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania for its activities, and, in the interval between sessions, to the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 70. The members of the government take the oath to the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 71. Ministers will be appointed from the deputies or from persons not belonging to the ranks of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Ministers who are not appointed from the ranks of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania may take part in the debates of the assembly, but are not allowed to vote. Art. 72. The government is in charge of the conduct of the state administration. It co-ordinates and gives general instructions to the departments concerned, directs and plans the national economy, draws up the state budget, maintains public order and the security of the State. The government conducts the general policy of the State in the sphere of international relations. It organizes and equips the armed forces. The government may organize and conduct special services of any kind for certain spheres of activity, directly depending on the council of ministers. The council of ministers may annul ministerial decisions which are not in accordance with the Constitution or the laws. The Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania may annul decisions taken by the council of ministers which are not in accordance with the Constitution or the laws. The decisions of the council of ministers are obligatory over the whole territory of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 73. \ Ministers are responsible for unlawful acts committed in the execution of their duties. A special law will regulate the method of prosecuting and judging ministers. Art. 74. Ministers conduct their departments on the basis of the general instructions given by the council of ministers. Ministers make decisions in accordance with the laws which are binding on all citizens.
Title VI

Local Organs of State Power Art. 75. The territory of the People's Republic of Rumania is divided for administrative purposes into: communes, districts, counties, and regions.



Modifications of these divisions can be made by law. Art. 76. The local organs of the state power are the local people's councils. Art. 77. The local people's councils are representative organs, elected for a four-year term by universal, direct, equal, and secret ballot. Art. 78. The local people's councils direct and conduct the local economic, social, and cultural activities, in accordance with the laws and instructions issued by the superior administrative organs. The local people's councils draw up and put into practice the economic plan and the local budget, taking into consideration the national, general plan and the general budget of the State; they ensure the good administration of local assets and enterprises, maintain public order, defend the rights of the citizens, ensure the application and respect of the laws, as well as take the necessary measures for improving the local administration. Art. 79. In carrying out their duties the local people's councils rely on the initiative and wide participation of the popular masses. Art. 80. The local people's councils report to the people. Art. 81. The local people's councils meet in ordinary and extraordinary working sessions. Art. 82. The directing and executive organs of the local people's councils are the executive committees. These are elected from the ranks of the respective local people's councils and are formed and function as established by law. Art. 83. The executive committees are responsible to the respective local people's councils. Art. 84. The people's councils and the local executive committees carry out their activities in accordance with the laws. They are subordinate to the superior people's councils and the superior executive committees, as well as to the central administrative organs of the-State. Art. 85. Sections of the people's councils to deal with various activities may be created, but their activities will be subordinate to the people's councils and the executive committees, under which they function. Regarding special technical guidance, they will be subordinate to the corresponding sections of the superior people's councils as well as to the appropriate central administrative organs of the State. Title VII Judicial Organs and the Office of the Public Prosecutor Art. 86. The judicial instances are: the Supreme Court, one for the whole country, the courts of appeal, the tribunals, and the people's courts. Art. 87. Certain special instances may be created by law for specific purposes. Art. 88. In all instances, except in the Supreme Court, the judicial proceedings take place with the assistance of people's assessors, except in cases where the law provides otherwise. Art. 89. The first president, the presidents, and the members of the Supreme Court are appointed by the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania, on the recommendation of the government. Art. 90. The Supreme Court supervises the activities of all judicial instances and organs as established by law.


Art. 91. In all judicial instances proceedings are public, except in cases or circumstances provided by law. Art. 92. The right of defense before all instances is guaranteed. Art. 93. The judges of all grades must, in the exercise of their duties, be guided only by the law and apply the law equally to all citizens. Art. 94. The organization and the functioning of the judicial instances, as well as the way of appointing and removing judges at all stages, will be determined by law. Art. 95. In the People's Republic of Rumania, the office of the public prosecutor supervises the observance of penal laws, both by civil servants and by the other citizens. Art. 96. The office of the public prosecutor especially supervises the prosecution and punishment of crimes committed against the democratic order and liberties, economic interests, national independence, and sovereignty of the Rumanian State. Art. 97. The office of the public prosecutor consists of one general public prosecutor of the People's Republic of Rumania and several public prosecutors. The organization, the competence, and the functioning of the office of the public prosecutor will be determined by law. Art. 98. The general public prosecutor is appointed by the Presidium of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania on the recommendation of the government. Title VIII Coat of Arms, Seal, Flag, and Capital Art. 99. The coat of arms of the People's Republic of Rumania represents mountains covered with forests, over which the sun rises. In the center there is an oil derrick, and around the coat of arms there is a crown made of spikes of wheat. Art. 100. The state seal bears the coat of arms of the country. Art. 101. The flag of the People's Republic of Rumania is made of the colors: blue, yellow, and red, in vertical stripes. In the center is the coat of arms of the country. Art. 102. The capital of the People's Republic of Rumania is the city of Bucharest. Title IX Amendment of the Constitution Art. 103. The Constitution of the People's Republic of Rumania may be amended in part or as a whole on the recommendation of the government or of one-third of the members of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Art. 104. The bill amending the Constitution is considered passed if voted by two-thirds of all members of the Great National Assembly of the People's Republic of Rumania. Title X Transitory Dispositions All existing codes and laws will be revised to agree with the

Art. 105. Constitution.

From the day the Constitution comes into force by its publication in the official monitor, all provisions of the law, decrees, regulations and all other provisions contrary to the stipulations of the Constitution are abolished.

