CONSTITUTIONS

EDITED AND WITH AN INTRODUCTION Y

Albert P. Blaustein Jay A. Sigler

PARAGON HOUSE PUBLISHERS
New

York

	

First edition Published in the United States by Paragon House Publishers 90 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10011 Copyright © 1988 by Albert P. Blaustein and Jay A. Sigler Published in cooperation with the Centre de Recherches pour le Droit Constitutionnel, Fribourg, Switzerland. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form, without written permission from the publisher, unless by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data. Constitutions that made history / edited by Albert P. Blaustein, Jay A. Sigler.-1st ed. p. cm. ISBN 0-913729-67-1 1. Constitutions. I. Blaustein, Albert P., 192I II. Sigler, Jay A. K3157.E5C67 1988 	 87-19381 342'.023—dc19 	 CIP 	 342.223] [

CONSTITUTION OF RUSSIA CODE OF FUNDAMENTAL STATE LAWS APRIL 23, 1906
FIRST DIVISION: THE FUNDAMENTAL STATE LAWS
Article r. The Russian State is one and indivisible. Article 2. The Grand Duchy of Finland, which constitutes an indivi-

sible part of the Russian State, shall be governed in its domestic affairs by special institutions on the basis of a special legislation. Article 3. The Russian language is the common language of the State and its use is obligatory in the Army, in the Navy, and in all State and public institutions. The use of the local languages and dialects in State and public institutions shall be determined by special laws.

CHAPTER ONE

On the Nature of the Supreme Autocratic Power
Article 4. To the All-Russian Emperor belongs the Supreme Autocratic Power. To obey his power, not only through fear, but also for the sake of conscience, is commanded by God Himself. Article 5. The person of our Sovereign the Emperor is sacred and inviolable. Article 6. The same Supreme Autocratic Power shall belong likewise to our Sovereign the Empress when the succession to the Throne, according to the order established for it, reaches a woman; her consort, however, shall not be considered as a Sovereign: he shall enjoy honors and prerogatives equal to those of the Emperors' consorts except the title. Article 7. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall exercise the legislative power in conjunction with the State Council and the State Duma. Article 8. To our Sovereign the Emperor shall belong the initiative in all matters of legislation. Solely upon his initiative may the Fundamental State Laws be subjected to a revision in the State Council and in the State Duma. Article 9. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall sanction the laws and without his sanction no law may go into effect. Article 10. The administrative power in all its extent shall belong to our Sovereign the Emperor within the boundaries of the whole Russian State. He shall exercise his power directly in matters of supreme administration; in matters of subordinate administration a limited amount of power may be entrusted by him, in accordance with the law, to competent organs and persons acting in his name and following his orders. Article 11. Our Sovereign the Emperor, in the exercise of the supreme administrative power, shall issue, in conformity with the laws, ukases for the organization and setting in motion of various parts of the State administration, as well as orders necessary for the implementation of the laws. Article 12. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall be the supreme leader of all external relations of the Russian State with foreign powers. He shall likewise determine the course of the international policy of the Russian State. Article 13. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall declare war and conclude peace as well as treaties with foreign states. Article 14. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall be the supreme chief of the Russian Army and Navy. To him shall belong the supreme command of all armed forces of the Russian State on land and sea. He shall determine the organization of the Army and the Navy and issue ukases and orders concerning distribution of the troops, their placing on a war footing, their training, the course of service to follow by the various ranks of the Army and the Navy, and, generally, everything bearing on the organization of

the armed forces and the defence of the Russian State. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall likewise determine, by act of supreme administration, restrictions with regard to the right to reside and acquire real estate in localities constituting fortress zones and points of support for the Army and the Navy. Article 15. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall declare localities to be in a state of war or in a state of emergency. Article 16. To our Sovereign the Emperor shall belong the right to coin money and to determine its external pattern. Article 17. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall appoint and discharge the President of the Council of Ministers, the Ministers, and the Chief Adminstrators of separate agencies as well as other officials, if for the latter no other mode of appointment and discharge has been established by law. Article 18. Our Sovereign the Emperor, by act of supreme administration, shall determine with regard to those in service, the limitations imposed by the requirements of government service. Article 19. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall grant titles, orders and other State distinctions, as well as rights of status. He shall likewise determine the conditions and the procedure for the granting of titles, orders and distinctions. Article 20. Our Sovereign the Emperor shall directly issue ukases and orders, both with regard to the estates forming his personal property and with regard to those called the Sovereign's estates, which, while they always belong to the reigning Emperor, cannot be bequeathed, submitted to partition, or subjected to any other form of transfer. Neither the former nor the latter estates shall be subject to taxation and contributions. Article 21. Our Sovereign the Emperor, as head of the Imperial House, shall make, according to the Organic Law of the Imperial Family, provisions with regard to the appanage estates. He shall likewise determine the organization of establishments and institutions within the province of the Minister of the Imperial Court, as well as the form of their administration. Article 22. The judicial power shall be exercised on behalf of our Sovereign the Emperor by courts, established by law, whose judgments shall be carried out in the name of the Imperial Majesty. Article 23. To our Sovereign the Emperor shall belong the pardon of convicts, the commutation of penalties, and general forgiveness of those who have committed criminal actions, with cessation of prosecution against them and freeing them from trial and punishment. To him also shall belong the remission, by way of the Monarch's mercy, of claims to be levied by the Treasury and, in general, the granting of favors in special cases which do not fall under the operation of general laws, provided that no legally protected interests or civil rights are infringed by it. Article 24. Our Sovereign the Emperor's ukases and orders, issued by him either by act of supreme administration or directly, shall be count-

ersigned by the President of the Council of Ministers or the competent Minister or by the Chief Administrator of a separate agency, and they shall be promulgated by the Ruling Senate. CHAPTER TWO

On the Order of Succession to the Throne Article 25. The Imperial All-Russian Throne shall be hereditary in the now happily reigning Imperial House. Article 26. From the Imperial All-Russian Throne shall be inseparable the Thrones of the Kingdom of Poland and of the Grand Duchy of Finland. Article 27. Both sexes shall have the right of succession to the Throne; but in preference this right shall belong to the male sex by order of primogeniture; however, should the last male branch die out, the succession to the Throne shall be transferred to the female line by right of substitution. Article 28. Accordingly, the succession to the Throne shall belong, first of all, to the oldest son of the reigning Emperor, and after him to all his male progeny. Article 29. After the extinction of this male line, the succession shall pass to the line of the Emperor's second son and to the latter's male progeny; and after extinction of the second male line, the succession shall pass to the line of the third son, and so forth. Article 3o. If the last male branch of the Emperor's sons dies out, the succession shall remain in the same line, but pass to the female branch of the last reigning Emperor, as being the nearest to the Throne, and within this branch it shall follow the same order, preference being given to a man over a woman, provided that the woman, from whom the right directly originated, never loses this right. Article 31. After the extinction of this line, the succession shall pass to the line of the oldest son of the Emperor-Progenitor, in its female issue, in which the nearest kinswoman of the last reigning male belonging to his son's line succeeds to the Throne, following the oldest branch descending from him or from his son, or, if there are no descending branches, following a lateral branch. In the absence of such a kinswoman, the man or the woman who steps into her place shall succeed to the Throne, preference being given to the male sex over the female sex as stated above. Article 32. After the extinction also of these lines, the succession shall pass to the female line of the remaining sons of the Emperor-Progenitor, following the same order, and afterwards to the line of the oldest daughter of the Emperor-Progenitor, in its male issue; and after the extinction of the latter, to its female issue, following the order fixed for the female branches of the Emperor's sons. Article 33. After the extinction of the male and female branches of the oldest daughter of the Emperor-Progenitor, the succession shall pass

to the male branch, and afterwards, to the female branch of the second daughter of the Emperor-Progenitor, and so forth. Article 34. The younger sister, even if she had sons, does not take away the right to succession from the older sister, even if the latter were unmarried; but a younger brother succeeds to the Throne before his older sisters. Article 35. If the succession reaches a female branch which already reigns on another Throne, it shall be left to the person who succeeds to the Throne to choose the faith and the Throne, and to abdicate jointly with the Heir-to-the-Throne the other faith and the other Throne, in case such a Throne is connected with another religious law; if there is no renunciation of faith, the person thereupon closest according to the order of succession shall succeed to the Throne. Article 36. Children issuing from the conjugal union of a person of the Imperial Family with a person who does not have a corresponding rank, i.e., does not belong to any reigning or sovereign house, shall have no right of succession to the Throne. Article 37. Under the operation of the rules on the order of the succession to the Throne stated above, freedom is left to a person having the right to the Throne to renounce this right, provided that no difficulty in the further succession to the Throne is created. Article 38. Such a renunciation, when it is promulgated and transformed into law, shall thereafter be considered as irrevocable. Article 39. The Emperor, or the Empress, succeeding to the Throne, at his, or her, accession to the latter and anointment, shall pledge themselves to a sacred observance of the above established laws on the succession to the Throne.
CHAPTER THREE

On our Sovereign the Emperor's' Majority, on Regency and Guardianship
Article 40. Majority of age is fixed at sixteen for the Sovereigns of both sexes and the Heir to the Imperial Throne. Article 41. If the Emperor succeeds to the Throne before this age, regency and guardianship shall be established until his majority. Article 42. The regency and the guardianship shall be either vested jointly in one person, or established separately, so that the regency is entrusted to one, the guardianship to another. Article 43. The appointment of the Regent and the Guardian, either jointly in one person or separately in two persons, shall depend on the wish and discretion of the reigning Emperor, who, for better security, should make this selection in anticipation of his decease. Article 44. If such an appointment were not made during the Em

peror's life, then, after his decease, the regency of the State and the guardianship with regard to the new Emperor's person during his minority shall belong to his father or his mother; but stepfather and stepmother shall be excluded. Article 45. When there is no father and no mother, the regency and the guardianship shall belong to the adult, of either sex, who is closest to the succession to the Throne among the kinsfolk of the underaged Emperor. Article 46. Legal causes of incapacity to regency and guardianship shall be: I) insanity, even if it is temporary; 2) second marriage contracted by a widower or a widow during the regency and the guardianship. Article 47. The Regent of the State must have a Council of Regency, and just as a Regent cannot be without a Council, there shall be no Council without a Regent. Article 48. The Council shall be composed of six persons of the two first ranks; they shall be selected by the Regent, who also shall appoint other persons should vacancies occur. Article 49. Persons of the Imperial Family of the male sex may sit on this Council, if selected by the Regent, but not before their majority of age, and they shall not be included in the number of the six persons constituting the Council. Article so. All cases without exception, subject to the personal decision of the Emperor, shall be brought before the Council of Regency, as well as all cases submitted both to him and his Council. The Council, however, shall not be concerned with guardianship. Article 51. The Regent shall have deciding vote. Article 52. The appointment of the Council and the selection of its members shall take place only in the absence of a different decision by the deceased Emperor, for the latter should have best knowledge of circumstances and people.
CHAPTER FOUR

On the Accession to the Throne and on the Subjects' Oath Article 53. After the Emperor's decease, his Heir shall ascend the Throne by the sole virtue of the law on the succession, which attributes this right to him. The Emperor's accession to the Throne shall be reckoned from the day of his predecessor's decease. Article 54. In the manifesto on the accession to the Throne shall also be proclaimed the lawful Heir-to-the-Throne, if there exists a person to whom the succession belongs by law. Article 55. An all-national oath shall be taken to confirm the subjects' fidelity to the Emperor who has ascended the Throne and to his lawful Heir, even if the latter was not named in the manifesto.

Article 56. Everyone shall take an oath according to his faith and

religious law.
Note 1. The Ruling Senate, having printed the oath of fidelity

according to the established form (Annex V), shall distribute it in a sufficient number of copies to all authorities generally, both military and civil; information shall also be sent to the Most Holy Synod for a smiliar arrangement on their part (a).—Everyone shall be sworn in by his superior in cathedrals, monasteries, or parish churches, as is convenient; while those under guard, but not yet sentenced to the loss of civil rights, shall be sworn in by the authorities of the places where they are kept (b).—Those of heterodox denominations, where there is no church of their confession, shall be sworn in in the administration hall, in the presence of the members of that administration (c).—Everyone who takes the oath of fidelity, if he is literate, shall sign the printed sheet according to which he swore. These sheets shall later be conveyed by all the authorities and administrations to the Ruling Senate.
Note 2. All subjects of the male sex in general, of whatever rank

and calling, who have reached the age of twelve, shall be sworn in.
CHAPTER FIVE

On the Sacred Coronation and Anointment
Article 57. After the accession to the Throne, the sacred coronation and anointment shall be performed according to the ritual of the Orthodox Greek-Russian Church. The time for this solemn rite shall be appointed by the Emperor at his discretion and announced beforehand for all-national information. Article 58. Following the Emperor's desire, his Most August wife shall be associated with him in this sacred celebration. But if the Emperor's coronation takes place before his marriage, his wife's coronation shall be performed afterwards only with the Emperor's special permission. Note 1. The sacred rite of coronation and anointment shall be

performed in the Moscow Cathedral of the Assumption, in the presence of the highest state authorities and estates summoned for this purpose by the Emperor (a).—The Coronation of All-Russian Emperors as Kings of Poland shall be included in the same sacred rite; deputies from the Kingdom of Poland shall be called to participate in this solemnity together with the deputies from the other parts of the Empire (b).

Note 2. The Emperor, before this sacred rite is performed, shall utter aloud for his faithful subjects the Creed of the OrthodoxCatholic faith according to the custom of Old Christian Sovereigns and his God-crowned ancestors; and afterwards, having donned the purple, placed upon his head the crown, and received the sceptre and the orb, he shall invoke on his knees the King of Kings in a prayer composed for the occasion, to wit: May God edify him, make him wise, and direct him in his great service as Tsar and Judge of the All-Russian Tsardom; may Wisdom seated on the Divine Throne be with him; may his heart be in God's hand in order that he may conduct everything for the benefit of the people entrusted to him to the glory of God, that on the day of God's judgment he may give answer to Him without shame.
CHAPTER SIX

On His Imperial Majesty's Title and the State Emblem
Article 59. The full title of the Imperial Majesty shall be as follows: "By God's propitiative grace, We, NN, Emperor and Autocrat of AllRussia, Moscow, Kiew, Vladimir, Novgorod; Tsar of Kazan, Tsar of Astrakhan, Tsar (King) of Poland, Tsar of Siberia, Tsar of Chersonesus Taurica, Tsar of Georgia; Sovereign of Pskov and Grand Prince of Smolensk, Lithuania, Volhynia, Podolia and Finland; Prince of Esthonia, Livonia, Courland and Semigalia, Samogitia, Belostok, Karelia, Tver, lugra, Perm, Viatka, Bolgaria and others; Sovereign and Grand Prince of Novgorod of the Down land, Chernigov, Riazan, Polotsk, Rostov, Yaroslavl, Beloozero, Udora, Obdoria, Kondia, Vitebsk, Mstislavl and Lord of all the Northern Region; and Sovereign of the land of Iveria, Kartalinia, and Kabarda and of the Armenian territory; Hereditary Sovereign and Master of the Circassian and the Mountain Princes and others; Sovereign of Turkestan; Heir of Norway, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein, Stormarn, Dithmarschen and Oldenburg, etc.., etc., etc." Article 6o. In certain cases defined by law this title of Imperial Majesty shall be expressed in abbreviation: "By God's propitiative grace, We, NN, Emperor and Autocrat of All Russia, Moscow, Kiev, Vladimir, Novgorod; Tsar of Kazan, Tsar of Astrahkan, Tsar (King) of Poland, Tsar of Siberia, Tsar of Chernosesus Taurica, Tsar of Georgia, Grand Prince (Duke) of Finland, etc., etc., etc." In other cases, also defined by law, the brief title of Imperial Majesty shall be used, of the following form: "By God's grace, We, NN, Emperor and Autocrat of All Russia, Tsar (King) of Poland, Grand Prince (Duke) of Finland, etc., etc., etc." Article 61. The Russian State emblem is a black, two-headed eagle on a golden escutcheon, crowned with two Imperial crowns, above which there is a third identical crown, of a bigger shape, with two streaming ribbon-ends of the Order of the Apostle Saint Andrew the First-Called.

The State eagle holds golden scepter and orb. On the eagle's breast there is the emblem of Moscow; on a scarlet escutcheon, the great martyr Saint George the Victorious, on horseback, striking a dragon with a golden spear. On the great State seal, the escutcheon with the above described twoheaded eagle is crowned with the helm of the Grand Prince Saint Alexander Nevsky and girded with the chain of the Order of the Apostle Saint Andrew the First-Called; on one side of the eagle is an image of the Archistrategus Saint Michael, and on the other one that of the Archangel Saint Gabriel. Above all this is placed a golden canopy studded with two-headed eagles and lined with ermine, with the inscription: "God is with us"; above the canopy the Imperial Crown and the State banner are displayed. Around the escutcheon are pictured the Family arms of His Imperial Majesty and the emblems of the Tsardoms of Kazan, Astrakhan, Poland, Siberia, Chersonesus Taurica and Georgia, and of the Grand Principalities of Kiev, Vladimir, Novgorod and Finland. Above the canopy, on six escutcheons, are the united emblems of all remaining principalities and territories mentioned in the full Imperial title (Art. 59). This full title of Imperial Majesty is placed on the borders of the seal. On the middle State seal are placed the same images as on the Great Seal, with the only exception of the State banner and the six upper escutcheons above the canopy with the united emblems of principalities and territories. On the borders is the Imperial title in abbreviated form (Art. 6o, pt. I). The small State seal is similar in general to the middle one, but there are no images of the Saint Archangels on it and no Family arms of His Imperial Majesty, while the emblems of the Tsardoms and the Grand Principalities which surround the main escutcheon are placed on the eagle's wings. On the borders of the seal is the Imperial title in brief form (Art. 6o, pt. 2).
Note. A detailed description of the State emblem and the State

seal in all its forms, and the rules on their use shall be stated in a special annex (Annex I).
CHAPTER SEVEN

On Faith
Article 62. Taking precedence and predominating in the Russian Empire shall be the Christian Orthodox Catholic Faith of the Eastern confession. Article 63. The Emperor, who holds the All-Russian Throne, cannot profess any other faith than the Orthodox faith (Art. 62). Article 64. The Emperor as a Christian Sovereign shall be the supreme defender and custodian of the dogmas of the predominating faith and the keeper of the true faith and pious discipline in the Holy Church. In this

sense the Emperor is called Head of the Church in the Act on the succession to the Throne of April 5, 1797 (1791o). Article 65. In the administration of the Church the Autocratic Power shall act through the Most Holy Ruling Synod, established by this Power. Article 66. All subjects of the Russian State not belonging to the predominating church, subjects by birth or admitted to be subjects, as well as foreigners who are in Russian service, or staying in Russia temporarily, shall enjoy everywhere the free exercise of their faith and may worship according to its rites. Article 67. Freedom of religion is granted not only to Christians of foreign confessions, but also to Jews, _Moslems and pagans: in order that all races residing in Russia praise God Almighty in different languages according to the religious law and confession of their forefathers, blessing the reign of Russian Monarchs, and beseeching the Creator of the Universe to augment the prosperity of the Empire and to fortify its strength. Article 68. The ecclesiastical affairs of Christians of foreign confessions and of non-Christians in the Russian Empire shall be administered by their spiritual authorities and the special Government agencies instituted for this purpose by the Supreme Power.
Note. The rules on protection of religious tolerance and its limits

shall appear in detail in the appropriate Statutes.
CHAPTER EIGHT

On the Rights and Duties of Russian Subjects
Article 69. The conditions for the acquisition of the rights of Russian citizenship, as well as for their loss, shall be determined by law. Article 70. The defense of the Throne and of the Fatherland is the sacred duty of every Russian subject. The male population, without distinction of status, shall be liable to military service in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 71. Russian subjects are obliged to pay taxes and duties established by law, and to perform services in accordance with the provisions of the law. Article 72. No one may be prosecuted for a criminal offence otherwise than in a manner determined by law. Article 73. No one may be held under arrest, except in the cases determined by law. Article 74. No one may be tried and punished except for criminal offences provided for by penal laws in force at the time they were committed, provided that newly issued laws do not exclude from the category of criminal offences those committed by the culprit. Article 75. Everyone's domicile shall be inviolable. No search or sei-

zure, without the master's consent, may be carried out in a domicile except in the cases and in the manner prescribed by law. Article 76. Every Russian subject shall have the right to choose freely his place of residence and his occupation, to acquire and to transfer property and to travel without impediment beyond the limits of the State. Limitations of these rights shall be established by special laws. Article 77. Property is inviolable. Compulsory expropriation of real estate, when such is necessary for any State or public benefit, is admissible only on the basis of a just and adequate compensation. Article 78. Russian subjects shall have the right to hold meetings, peacefully and without arms, for purposes not contrary to the laws. The conditions under which meetings may be held, the manner of closing them, as well as restrictions concerning their place, shall be determined by law. Article 79. Everyone may, within the limits established by law, express his thoughts orally and in writing, as well as disseminate them in print or by other means. Article 80. Russian subjects shall have the right to form associations and unions for purposes not contrary to the laws. The conditions for forming associations and unions, their mode of functioning, the conditions and the mode of giving to them legal personality, as well as the manner of dissolving associations and unions, shall be determined by law. Articles 81. Russian subjects shall enjoy freedom of religion. The conditions under which they may enjoy this freedom shall be determined by law. Article 82. Foreigners sojourning in Russia shall enjoy the rights of Russian subjects within the limitations established by law. Article 83. Exemptions from the operation of the provisions stated in this chapter with regard to localities declared to be in a state of war, or in a state of emergency, shall be determined by special laws.
CHAPTER NINE On the Laws

Article 84. The Russian Empire shall be ruled on the firm basis of laws, which are enacted according to established procedure. Article 85. The laws shall be equally binding upon all Russian subjects without exception, and upon foreigners sojourning in the Russian State. Article 86. No new law may be passed without the approval of the State Council and the State Duma and come into force without the sanction of our Sovereign the Emperor. Article 87. When the State Duma is in recess and extraordinary circumstances create the necessity of a measure requiring legislative deliberation, the Council of Ministers shall submit the matter directly to the Emperor. Such a measure, however, may not introduce changes either in

the Fundamental State Laws or in the Organic Laws of the State Council or the State Duma or in the provisions on elections to the Council or to the Duma. Such a measure becomes inoperative if a legislative bill, corresponding to the adopted measure, is not introduced by the competent Minister or the Chief Administrator of a separate agency into the State Duma within the first two months after the resumption of the Duma's business, or if the State Duma or the State Council does not adopt the bill. Article 88. Laws specially enacted for a certain locality or a part of the population shall not be abrogated by a new general law, unless in this law there is a specific provision for such abrogation. Article 89. Every law shall have force only for the future, except in the cases when in the law itself there is a provision that its force also extends to the foregoing time, or that it is merely a confirmation and clarification of a former law. Article go. The general custody of the laws shall belong to the Ruling Senate. Therefore, all laws must be sent to the Ruling Senate in the original or in certified copies. Article 91. The laws shall be promulgated for general information by the Ruling Senate according to established procedure, and they shall not be enforced before promulgation. Article 92. Legislative provisions shall not be subject to promulgation if the procedure followed in enacting them does not correspond to the clauses of these Fundamental Laws. Article 93. After promulgation, the law shall receive binding force from the date specified in the law itself. If, however, such a date should not be fixed—then from the day when the sheet of the Senate's publication in which the law is printed is received in a given locality. It may be stated in the law itself that before its promulgation it will be put into execution by telegraph or by couriers. Article 94. A law may not be abrogated otherwise than by force of law. Therefore, as long as an existing law has not been expressly abrogated by a new law, the former shall keep its full force. Article 95. No one may plead ignorance of the law when this law was promulgated in accordance with established procedure. Article 96. Provisions concerning the service-in-the-rank, technical and economic agencies of the War and Navy Departments, as well as ordinances and instructions to the institutions and officials of these departments, shall be submitted directly to our Sovereign the Emperor, after consideration by the War Council or the Admiralty Council, to whichever they belong, provided these provisions, ordinances and instructions strictly concern the aforementioned institutions alone, do not touch upon matters of general laws and do not call for a new expenditure from the Treasury, or if the new expenditure called for by them is covered by expected savings on the

budget of the Ministry of War or Ministry of the Navy, to which it belongs. In case, however, the new expenditure cannot be covered by the savings referred to, submission of the aforementioned provisions, ordinances, and instructions to the Emperor for confirmation is permitted only after the appropriation of a corresponding credit has been solicited in accordance with established procedure. Article 97. Provisions concerning the tribunals of military and naval justice shall be enacted in accordance with the procedure established in codes of military and naval law.
CHAPTER TEN

On the State Council, the State Duma and the Mode of their Activity Article 98. The State Council and the State Duma shall be summoned every year by ukases of our Sovereign the Emperor. Article 99. The duration of the yearly business of the State Council and the State Duma, and the dates of their recess from business in the course of the year shall be determined by ukases of our Sovereign the Emperor. Article 1oo. The State Council shall be composed of members appointed by the Emperor and of elective members. The total number of members called by the Supreme Power to sit in the (legislative) Council from among the members of the State Council appointed by the Emperor may not exceed the total number of elective members in that Council. Article mi. The State Duma shall be composed of members elected by the people of the Russian Empire fox-five years in accordance with the principles indicated in the legal ordinances on the elections to the Duma. Article 102. The State Council shall verify the credentials of its elective members. Likewise, the State Duma shall verify the credentials of its members. Article 103. The same person may not be simultaneously a member of the State Council and a member of the State Duma. Article 104. The elective membership of the State Council may be replaced by a new group of members before the expiration of the terms of their mandates. This shall be done by ukase of our Sovereign the Emperor, which also shall order new elections of the Council's members. Article 105. The State Duma may be dissolved by ukase of our Sovereign the Emperor before the expiration of the five-year term of its members' mandates. The same ukase shall order new elections to the Duma, and fix the time of its convocation. Article 106. The State Council and the State Duma shall enjoy equal rights in matters of legislation. Article 107. The State Council and the State Duma shall have the right to initiate, in the manner determined by their Organic Laws, proposals

concerning the abrogation or amendment of existing laws and the enactment of new laws, with the exception of the Fundamental State Laws, the initiative for the revision of which belongs to our Sovereign the Emperor solely. Article 108. The State Council and the State Duma shall have the right to address, in the manner determined by their Organic Laws, interpellations to the Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies, who are subordinated to the Ruling Senate in accordance with the law, in connection with apparently illegal actions committed on their part or on that of persons and institutions under their authority. Article 109. Within the province of the State Council and the State Duma and subject to discussion by them in the manner determined by their Organic Laws shall be the matters indicated in the Organic Laws of the Council and the Duma. Article Ho. Legislative proposals shall be discussed in the State Duma and, after approval by it, shall be brought before the State Council. Legislative proposals, drafted on the initiative of the State Council, shall be discussed in the Council, and, after approval of it, shall be brought before the Duma. Article III. Legislative bills not adopted by the State Council or by the State Duma shall be considered as rejected. Article 112. Legislative bills drafted on the initiative of the State Council or the State Duma and not assented to by the Emperor may not be reintroduced for legislative consideration in the course of the same session. Legislative bills, drafted on the initiative of the State Council or the State Duma and rejected by either of these institutions, may be reintroduced for legislative consideration in the course of the same session if such is the Emperor's command. Article 113. Legislative bills brought before the State Duma and approved both by it and the State Council, as well as legislative bills on the initiative of the State Council and approved both by it and the State Duma, shall be submitted to our Sovereign the Emperor by the Chairman of the State Council. Article 114. When the State budget is discussed, the sums appropriated for payments concerning State debts and other obligations contracted by the Russian State shall not be subject to exclusion or reduction. Article 115. Credits for the expenditures of the Ministry of the Imperial Court, as well as those for the institutions within its province, shall not be subject to discussion by the State Council and the State Duma, when in sums not exceeding the appropriations in the State Budget for 1906. Likewise not subject to discussion by them shall be modifications of the aforementioned credits conditioned by the provisions of the Organic Law of the Imperial Family in connection with changes occurring in this Family.

Article 116. If the State budget is not confirmed at the beginning of the fiscal period, the last budget confirmed in accordance with the established procedure shall remain in force, with only those modifications which are conditioned by carrying out legislative enactments passed after its confirmation. Pending the promulgation of a new budget, credits shall be opened gradually by decisions of the Council of Ministers and placed at the disposal of Ministries and Chief Administrations to the extent of actual need. These credits may not, however, exceed, in their total monthly aggregate, one-twelfth part of the sum total of expenditures according to the budget. Article 117. Extraordinary credits, exceeding the budget, for the needs of wartime and for special preparations preceding war, shall be opened in all Departments by act of supreme administration in accordance with the principles determined by law. Article 118. State loans to cover expenditures both within the limits of the budget, as well as those in excess of the budget shall be authorized in the manner established for the confirmation of the State budget of revenues and expenditures. State loans to cover expenditures in the cases and within the limits foreseen in Art. 116, as well as loans to cover the expenditures assigned on the basis of Art. 117, shall be authorized by our Sovereign the Emperor by act of supreme administration. The time and the conditions under which the State loans are contracted shall be determined by act of supreme administration. Article 119. If after the introduction in the Duma at the proper time of proposals concerning the number of people needed for the reinforcement of the Army and the Navy, a law on this subject should not be enacted by May 1, in accordance with the established procedure, then the necessary number of people shall be called to military service by a ukase of our Sovereign the Emperor, not to exceed, however, that assigned in the previous year.
CHAPTER ELEVEN

On the Council of Ministers, the Ministers and the Chief Administrators of Separate Agencies
Article 120. The direction and unification of the actions of the Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies in matters both of legislation and of the highest administration of the State shall devolve upon the Council of Ministers in accordance with the principles determined by law. Article 121. The Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies shall have the right of participation in the vote of the State Council and the State Duma only if they are members of these institutions. Article 122. Compulsory decrees, instructions, and decisions issued

by the Council of Ministers, the Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies, as well as by other institutions empowered by law, may not contradict the laws. Article 123. The President of the Council of Ministers, the Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies shall be responsible to our Sovereign the Emperor for the general course of the administration of the State. Each of them shall be individually responsible for his own actions and decisions. Article 124. For criminal acts committed in office, the President of the Council of Ministers, the Ministers and Chief Administrators of separate agencies shall be subject to civil and criminal responsibility in accordance with principles determined by law.

