CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

by THIERRY VERHELST & FILIP REYNTJENS

RWANDA

Issued April 1980

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

VALERIE J. KOIF of Constitutional Text Translated into English by French version

© Copyright 1980 by Oceana Publications, Inc.
Library

of Congress Catalog Card No. 76-141327

international Standard Book Number (ISBN): O-379-00467-4

CONSTITUTION

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA PREAMBLE The people of Rwanda, Confident in Almighty God, Cognizant of the task of liberation begun by the Revolution of 1959 and sanctioned by the accession to independance on July 1, 1962. Desiring to adapt the constitutional principles established on November 24, 1962 to national realities; Determined to continue the task of renovation begun on the memorable day of July 5, 1973 in order to safeguard the results of the 1959 revolution and in particular to restore and strengthen peace and national unity; Faithful to democratic principles and concerned for the protection of the individual and the promotion of respect for fundamental liberties in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; Convinced of the rightness of the essential principles of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development with a view to ensuring the economic, social, and cultural development of the Nation; Cognizant in particular that peace, national unity, and the mobilization of all life forces of the Nation are essential prerequisites for this development; Convinced of the Nation's need to reply first and foremost upon its own efforts to construct the Republic; Conscious of the need to develop a national mentality in character with a People determined to be masters of their destiny; Recognizing that the human ideal of freedom and civil liberty cannot be reached without democratic institutions assuring liberty, justice, peace, and national unity; Desiring to guarantee the benefits of liberty, prosperity, and personal development to present and ruture generations; Resolved to contribute to peaceful coexistence between nations, to strengthened cooperation between peoples, and to the construction of African unity; HEREBY ESTABLISH AND ADOPT THIS CONSTITUTION FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA. -1-

CHAPTER I. THE REPUBL IC Article 1 Rwanda is a democratic., social and sovereign Republic whose name shall be known as "The Republic of Rwanda," Its principle is "Government of the people, by _he people, for the people." An tcle 2 The monarchy is abolished and may not be restored. Article 3 The national flag consists of the colors red, yellow, and green, with the red band nearest the staff and the yellow band showing a black letter "R" in the center. The motto of the Republic is "Liberty, Cooperation, Progress." The seal of the Republic consists of the ideograms of the dove and olive branch, the hoe and sickle, and the bow and arrow, symbolizing peace, labor, and defense of democratic rights respectively; it also contains the inscription of the name and motto of the Republic upon two national flags placed in opposition to each other. The national hymn shall be determined by Law. Article 4 The national language is Kinyarwanda. The official languages are Kinyarwanda and French. Article 5 Rwandan nationality and conditions of naturalization shall be determined by law. Article 6 All power emanates from the Nation. National sovereignty belongs to the Rwandan people who may exercise it through representation or by way of referendum. Article 7 The Rwandan people are politically organized in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development; it is the sole political formation outside which no political activity may be exercized. -2--

The objective of this movement is to unite, stimulate, and strengthen the efforts of the Rwandan people to achieve its development in peace and national unity. The Movement shall be governed by its statutes. Every Rwandan is •a birthright member of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. In criminal matters, members of the Central Committee of the Movement are justiciable only in the Cour de Cessation, deciding in plenary court and. in first and last resort. Article 8 Suffrage is always universal, equal and secret; it may be direct or indirect. Article 9 All Rwandan citizens of majority age not excluded by law may vote, in the conditions set out by law. Article 10 The terms and conditions of "popular consultation" shall be determined by law. Article 11 The Republic is divided into prefectures with legal personality, Each prefecture may be divided into sub-prefectures. Each prefecture is divided into communes with legal personality. The number, limits, and organization of the prefectures, subprefectures and communes shall be determined by legislation. The capital of the Republic shall be determined by law. CHAPTER II. CIVIL LIBERTIES Article 12 The human person is sacred; his protection is guaranteed by law. The freedom of the person is guaranteed; no one can be persecuted, arrested, detained or convicted, except in the cases determined by a law in effect before the commission of the act and in the forms prescribed by law. No offense may be punished by penalties not foreseen by law before the commission of the act.

Every person is presumed innocent as long as a final conviction has not been pronounced. Article 13 No one shall be submitted to measures of security except in the cases and the forms provided for by law, for reasons of public order or State security. Article 14 Penal responsibility is personal. Civil responsibility shall be determined by law Legal defense is an absolute right in all states and degrees of judicial proceedings. Article 15 The right of asylum shall be recognized under the conditions prescribed by law. Extradition shall be authorized only within the limits provided by law. Article 16 All citizens are equal before the law without distinction of race, color, origin, ethnic group, clan affiliation, sex, opinion, religion, or social position. Article 17 All forms of slavery and bondage are prohibited. Article 18 Freedom of worship, of conscience, and of expression in any manner are guaranteed, except in cases of any illegalities committed when these freedoms are exercised. Article 19 The freedom of association is guaranteed under the terms defined by law; prior authorization may not be prescribed. Article 20 Freedom to assemble peacefully and without arms is guaranteed within the confines of the law. Prior authorization may be prescribed only by law, and only for meetings in open air, on the public road or in public places, and only if justified by reason of security, public order or health. -4-

Article 21 All citizens have the right to circulate freely and to settle in the national territory, which they can leave and return to; the exercise of this right may be restricted only by law for reasons of public order or security of the State. Article 22 The private life of the individual may not be interfered with. The privacy of postal, telegraphic and telephone communications, and communications of all other kinds, is guaranteed; it may not be restricted except by law. Private residences are inviolable. Domiciliary visits are prohibited except in those cases and in the forms defined by law. Article 23 Private property, individual or collective, is inviolable. It may not be threatened except in cases of public need legally attested and subject to just and prior indemnity. Article 24 The family, foundation of Rwandan society, is protected by the State. It is the right and responsibility of parents to raise their children. Article 25 Only monogamous marriage, performed under the conditions established by law, is legally recognized. The terms and conditions of divorce shall be defined by law. Article 26 Freedom of education is guaranteed, except in cases of any illegalities committed when this freedom is exercised. However, the recognition of diplomas and certificates of the independent institutions, and those of the institutions wholly or partly subsidized by the State, shall be determined by law. Article 27 Contingent on the application of Article 24, primary education is compulsory and free of charge for all school-age children according to the terms and conditions established by law. -5-

Article 28 National service, civil or military, is organized by law. Article 29 Extrapenal hard labor is hereby abolished and cannot be restored. Article 30 Everyone has the right to work, to choose his work freely, and to equitable and satisfying terms of labor. Article 31 Each worker may defend his rights through trade unions, except where any illegalities are committed when doing so. Article 32 The right to strike shall be exercised within the framework It may not threaten the citizen's of the laws governing it. freedom to work. The right of public service employees to strike is not recognized. Article 33 The judicial branch shall assure respect for the people's rights and freedoms under the conditions established by law.
CHAPTER III. THE POWERS

Article 34 The division and collaboration of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers are hereby established and shall be regulated by the present Constitution. Chapter1.TxcuiveBranh Article 35 Executive power is vested in the President of the Republic, whose ap pointed Ministers or Secretaries of State shall assist him. Article 36 Indemnities, pensions and other material benefits related to presidential and ministerial functions shall be determined by law.

Article 37 The President of the Republic, his Ministers and Secretaries of State may neither acquire nor alienate State property, nor exchange personal property for that of the State. The duties of the aforementioned officers are incompatible with all other paid ; professional. activities. Article 38 The President of the Republic, his Ministers and Secretaries of State enjoy legal immunity that may he lifted. only by a three-fourths majority of the members of the National Development Council voting in a secret ballot. The President of the Republic, his Ministers and Secretaries. of State are subject to the jurisdiction. of Cour de Cessation, which acts as a. court of first instance and of last resort. The President and his Ministry ma y not be bodily arrested without the authorization of the National Development Council. Section I. The President of the Republic Article 39 The President of the Republic is the Head of State and of the Government. Article 40 At the start of each legislative session, the President of the Republic shall be elected through direct universal suffrage by a majority of votes, according to terms dictated by law. The President of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, shall be the only candidate for the office of In case of failure to obtain a President of the Republic. majorit y vote, a new National Revolutionary Movement for Development president shall be designated. The national presidential election will then take place within the following thirty days. The presidential candidate shall be at least thirty-five years of age. The President of the Republic shall serve for a term of fiveyears. The President of the Re p ublic is eligible for re-election.

Article 41 Before beginning his duties, the President of the Republic shall take the folliwing oath in front of the National Development Council: "I swear to the Nation to faithfully fulfill the duties that have been entrusted to me, to remain loyal to the Republic and to promote the interests of the Rwandan people." Article 42 The President of the Republic may resign from office. His resignation shall be subject to acceptance by the National Development Council. In the case of inability to express his will, the President of the Republic shall be replaced by the Secretary-General of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. In case of resignation, death or any other reason for the cessation of presidential duties, the Secretary-General of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development shall fulfill the Presidency until a new election is held. A new election must take place within ninety days. In the cases cited in the above paragraph, the outgoing Ministry shall continue in office until the formation of the new Government. Article 43 When neither the President of the Republic nor the SecretaryGeneral of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development are able to fulfill the office of the Presidency for one of the reasons stated above, presidential duties shall be assumed by the president of the National Development Council until the election of a new national President. Article 44 The President of the Republic: 1) 2) Shall appoint and dismiss all members of Government and inform the National Development Council of this. Shall determine the nature and sphere of the duties of his Ministers and Secretaries of State. The President shall delegate authority to his Ministry for affairs relevant to its departments. He shall determine the scope of this authority. 3) Shall determine and conduct the general acitvity of the Government. -8-

4) 5) 6)

Shall preside over the Council of Government. Shall appoint the superior civil, judicial, and military officers upon the advice of the competent Ministers. Shall appoint, accredit, and dismiss ambassadors and other representatives abroad. Foreign diplomatic missions shall be accredited by him. Shall represent the Republic in foreign relations. Shall negociate, conclude, and ratify all treaties, accords and agreements, and report them to the National Development Council as soon as the interest and the security of the State allows it. However, peace treaties, alliance treaties, treaties involving modifications of the borders of the national territory or affecting the rights of sovereignty, treaties concerning the association of the Republic with one or more other States and treaties with financial implications not provided for in the budget, can be executed only after approval by law. The federation of the Republic of Rwanda with one or several other democratic nations must be approved by popular referendum.

7) 8)

9)

Has the power to declare war and conclude armistice.

10) Sanctions and promulgates laws within the eight days following a declaration of constitutionality on those laws. 11) Has the right to exercise a suspension veto on laws voted upon by the National Development Council. When exercising this right, he must send the bill back to the Council for review within fifteen days. If the bill is passed a second time and is not declared unconstitutional, it must be sanctioned and promulgated. 12) Shall pass decrees necessary for law enforcement without suspending the laws themselves or dispensing with their enforcement.

13) May address the Nation and the National Development Council on matters which do not give rise to any debate. 14) May suspend the National Development Council for a maximum of fifteen days, not more than once during the same session.

-9-

13) May exercise the right of free pardon. 15) May use the right to print currency. Article 45 The President is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Article 46 The President is the supreme guardian of the Constitution. In the case of a violation of the Constitution by the President of the Republic, a majority of four-fifths of the National Development Council may declare the President unworthy of office. Upon confirmation of this declaration by the Constitutional Court, the President shall forfeit his office.
Section II. The Government

Article 47 The President of the Republic, Head of the Government, shall be assisted by his Ministers of Secretaries of State in the exercise of executive power; they carry out the functions assigned to them by the President of the Republic and take care of the execution of laws and decrees concerning the activities of the departments under their supervision. All acts of the President of the Republic shall be countersigned by a Minister or a Secretary of State who, by doing so, assumes the responsibility of that act. The Ministers and Secretaries of State execute, by way of decree, the laws and regulations under their responsibility. Article 48 The Ministers and Secretaries of State shall convene u pon the request of the President of the Republic. When convened, the Council. of Government must be consulted on the following points: -decisions affecting general Government policy; -drafts of laws and. law-decrees; -drafts of presidential decrees concerning the execution of laws or laws-decrees; -appointments and dismissals to all higher office of the State; -dissolution of the National Development Council.

The Secretary-General of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development may attend meetings of the Council of Government, with consultative status only. Article 49 The Ministers and Secretaries of State are responsible towards the President of the Republic; moreover, they are responsible towards the National Development Council under the conditions defined in the present constitution. Article 50 The Ministers and Secretaries of State, and the President of the Republic are interde p endent. However the cessation of Ministerial or Secretarial functions for any reason does not entail the resignation of the Government. Each Minister or Secretary of State may present his resignation in his own name to the President of the Republic. The resignation is final only if not withdrawn within eight days, and onlyPresident. if accepted by the BL	2apCegir.sltvnThce Article 52 Legislative power shall be collectively exercised by the President of the Republic and the National Development Council. Section I. The National Development Council Article 52 The National Development Council shall consist of "Deputies on the National Development Council." The deputies shall be elected for a term of five years by direct universal suffrage. They may resign from office. No one may be elected deputy if he is not Rwandan, 21 years of age, and fulfilling other conditions established by electoral law. The law shall determine the number of deputies, the conditions of election, the terms of conflict of interest as well as the indemnities of deputies. Article 53 Preemtory electoral mandates are invalid; the deputies' right to vote is personal.

Article 54 The National Development Council shall constitute its office by electing its President., Vice-President and Secretary at the beginning of each legislature. Article 55 The National Development Council is directed by its President.; in his absence, the Council shall be directed by its VicePresident. Article 56 The National Development Council shall, in its internal regulations, determine its organization in the manner in which it will carry out its functions. Article 57 The National Development Council shall as of right convene twice a year in ordinary session and may hold emergency sessions when necessary. The two ordinary sessions shall open on the third Tuesday of October and the third Tuesday of April respectively. The first session in the first year of the legislature shall as of right open eight days after the legislative elections. The National Development Council shall be convened by its President.. An emergency session may be called for by its President., by an absolute majority of its members or by the President. of the Republic. In an emergency session, the Council may deal only with those matters related to the emergency. Article 58 The National Development Council must meet in the Capital, except in cases of force majeure. Every discussion, whatever its object, on matters without summons or not on the agenda or held outside the sessions or the place mentioned in the summons is void. Article 59 National Development Council meetings are open to the public. Transcripts of proceedings shall be published. The Council may with an absolute majority decide to hold closed meetings either at the request of the President. of the Republic, the President. of the National Development Council, or one third of the Council members. -12-

Article 60 Deputies may not be prosecuted for opinions or votes in the exercise of their functions. During the sessions, except when they are caught in the act, deputies may be prosecuted for other facts, or bodily arrested, only with the authorization of a majority of 3/4 of the members of the National Development Council. The prosecution or the detention resulting from being caught in the act or commenced outside the session is suspended during the sessions if the National Development Council so requires, except in the case of a final conviction. The deputies are to be judged by the cour de cassation in full chambers and in first and last resort. Article 61 At the beginning of the legislature, the National Development Council confirms the powers of its members. A deputy may be relieved of his duties if he becomes ineligible according to the current electoral laws. He shall forfeit his office on a vote of a three-fourths majority, voting by secret ballot. Article 62 Not more than one quarter of the deputies may be appointed as Minister or Secretary of State. If a deputy accepts a nomination by the overnment in a paid function except that of Minister or Secretary of State, he shall forfeit his seat and can take up his function again only after a new election. No deputy may acquire or alienate State property, or exchange personal property for that of the State. Section II. Legislation Article 63 Legislative power is exercised by means of laws. The law may intervene in all matters. In no case shall regulations or by-laws contravene the law. Article 64 In cases of emergency or when it is impossible for the National Development Council to convene, the President. of the Republic shall legislate through law-decrees drawn up in the Council of Government. -13-

Without ratification by the National Development Council in its next session the law-decrees become null. Article 65 Both the. Council deputies and the President. of the Republic may propose laws. The deputies and the President. of the Republic have the right of amendment. Article 66

will result in

Propositions, bills and amendments are inadmissable if they a decrease in public resources, or in the creation or increase in public expenses, unless they are submitted in conjunction with an equivalent proposal to increase economic returns or decrease expenses.

Article 67 Legislation shall be passed by an absolute majority of the members; organic laws shall be passed by a majority of twothirds; laws may not be passed in derogation of organic laws. No law may be adopted until voted upon article by article. Voting shall be done either by voice vote or by sitting and standing; when voting on an entire law, the vote shall be taken by roll call. The secret ballot shall be used in matters of personal status and in cases defined by Council regulation. Article 68 Either a de puty or the President. of the Republic may call for a vote of urgency on a proposition or bill. When a vote of urgency is called for by a deputy, the National Development Council shall determine the existence of such an urgency. When it is called for by the President. of the Republic, it is always granted.

In

all cases where a vote of urgency is granted, the legislation in question has priority on the agenda.

Article 69 Before their promulgation, laws and law-decrees must be transmitted to the Constitutional Court, which must decide their constitutionality within eight days or in cases of urgency within four days. -14-

If the Court declares a proposed law unconstitutional, it will return the text to the National Development Council or to the President. of the Republic, as the case may be, for review. Article 70 The National Development Council shall vote on financial legislation which determines State resources and expenses under the conditions defined by an organic law. All budgetary transfers from one section to another must be authorized by law. Article 71 Each year the National Development Council shall vote on the issue of a balanced budget. If it has not been voted upon forty days. after the opening session of the Council, the proposed budgetary plan must be returned to the Council by the President. of the Republic within fifteen days.. If the Council does not decide within the following fifteen days.,oriftenvoablcedugt,hbe plan shall be established by the Government on basis of the one for the previous fiscal year. Article 72 No tax measures may be established, modified, or done away with except by law; no exemptions or modifications may be accorded except where stipulated by law. No monopoly may be formed except by law and for a stipulated length of time. Article 73 Only the legislative power shall give the genuine interpretation of laws. Chapter 3. Relations between the National Development Council and the Government Article 74 The President. of the Republic must be informed of the agenda of the National Development Council and of its committees.

-15-

The President. of the Republic, his Ministers and Secretaries of State, may attend National Development Council meetings with experts of their choice when they so desire. They may express their opinions but may vote only if they are deputies. Article 75 The means open to the National Development Council to investigate and check governmental action are: -verbal inquiries; -written inquiries; -interpellation; -committee hearings; -investigation committees. An organic law shall fix the conditions and procedure for applying the aforementioned methods of investigation and checking by the National Development Council on the actions of the Government. Article 76 The Court of Accounts is charged with the examination, liquidation, and drawing up of all public service accounts. It shall submit a report on the general account of the State to the National Development Council. The Court of Accounts shall be organized by an organic law. Article 77 Through the vote of a motion of censure, the National Development Council may question the responsibility of a Minister or Secretary of State. Such a motion is debatable only if an interpellation has remained without effect and if it is signed by at least 1/5 of the members of the National Development Council. The vote may not take place earlier than forty-eight hours after the introduction of the motion, which must be adopted in a secret ballot and with an absolute majority of the members. The closure of ordinary or emergency sessions is delayed as of right to allow the application of the provisions of this article. Article 78 If a motion of censure is adopted, the Ministers or Secretaries of State whose responsibility has been questioned must present their resignation to the President. of the Republic. If the motion of censure is rejected, the initiators may not propose another one during the same session. -16-

Article 79 The President. of the Republic may, upon consultation of the Government Council, declare the dissolution of the National Development Council; however, if he declares a second dissolution during the same term of office, it causes his own resignation. Parliamentary elections take place within 90 days., in accordance with Article 52. As the case may be, the election of a President. of the Republic takes place within 90 days., in accordance with article 40. Article 80 The cessation of functions of the President. of the Republic, for whatever reason, provokes the dissolution of the National Development Council. Elections then take place in accordance with article 79. Chapter 4. The Judicial Branch Judicial power is exercised by the courts, the tribunals, and other jurisdictional entities; it is independent of both the Legislative and Executive branches. The President. of the Republic shall guarantee the independance of the judicial power. Justice shall be rendered in the name of the people. Article 82 Judges are appointed and dismissed by the nation's President. on nomination of the Minister of Justice and on the concurrent advice of the Supreme Council of Justice. The organization of the Supreme Council of Justice shall be determined by law. Article 83 The following Courts of common jurisdiction are hereby recognized by the present Constitution; District Courts, Courts of the First Instance, Courts of Appeal and a Cour de Cassation. The Court de Cassation does not decide on the merits, notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 7, 38 and 80. Article 84 The Council of State shall take cognizance of appeals formed against regulations, decrees and decisions of administrative authorities and supervize the regularity of popular consultations. -17-

Article 85 The Constitutional Court, composed of the Cour de Cessation and the Council of State, is responsible for overseeing the constitutionality of laws and decree laws. It is the sole court to declare forfeiture of office by the nation's President. under the conditions defined by Article 46. Article 86 Other courts may be created by organic law only. The organization and jurisdiction of the courts, tribunals, and other jurisdictional entities shall be determined by an. organic law. Article 87 No one may be separated against his will from the judge assigned to him by law. Article 88 Judicial hearings shall be public except when by judgment it is decided that open hearings will threaten public order or morality. Article 89 All verdicts and judgments shall be declared in public. Article 90 The courts shall appl y and enforce regulations only when they are in compliance with the Constitution and with the laws. Title IV - Constitutional Amendment Article 91 Both the National Development Council and the nation's President. may initiate constitutional revisions. No proposal to revise the Constitution shall be considered if it threatens the republican structure of the State, the integrity of national territory, or the democratic principles of the Republic. All recommendations for revision emanating from the National Development Council must be presented by at least two-thirds of its members. All revisions must be adopted by a majorit y of three-fourths of the National Development Council members. -18-

Title

V - General and

Transitional Provisions

Article 92 All laws and decrees can enter into force only if they are published in the Official Journal of the Republic in the conditions determined by law. No one can invoke ignorance of a regularly published law. Article 93 Legislation not contrary to this Constitution will remain in effect as long as it is not modified, abrogated or replaced by new legislation. Customary law applies only if in accordance with this Constitution, the law, public order and morality. Article 94 No oath may be imposed by a law determining its content and the procedure for taking it, notwithstanding the provision of Article 41. Article 95 All foreigners shall enjoy the legal protection .accorded to persons and property as well as the civil liberties recognized by this Constitution, save for exceptions established by law. Article 96 The President. of the Republic in office when this Constitution is promulgated shall assume the duties of Head of State and Government until the presidential election is held. Article 97 The presidential election shall take place not more than 30 days. after the promulgation of this Constitution. The President. of the Republic shall determine the date of the parliamentary elections. Article 98 This Constitution hereby abrogates and replaces the Constitution of November 24, 1962, as amended until this day. It shall enter into effect on the day of its promulgation by the President. of the Republic after its adoption by way of popular referendum.

-19-

