Title: Date Adopted: Country: Copyright: Translation Type: Translator:

Constitution of the Republic of Senegal, 2001 01/07/2001 Senegal Oceana Publications, Inc. Proprietary Gisbert H. Flanz

CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL Table of Contents Title I: The State and Sovereignty Title II: The Public Freedoms and (Freedoms) of the Human Person, Economic and Social and Collective Rights Title III: The President of the Republic Title IV: The Government Title V: On the Opposition Title VI: The National Assembly Title V: Relations Between the Legislative Power and the Executive Power Title VIII: The Judicial Power Title IX: International Treaties Title X: The High Court of Justice Title XI: The Local Collectivities Title XII: On Revision Title XIII: Transitory Provisions

TITLE I THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY

Article 1. The Republic of Senegal is secular, democratic, and social. It assures the equality before the law of all citizens, without distinction of origin, race, sex (or) religion. It respects all faiths. The official language of the Republic of Senegal is French. The national languages are the Diola, the Malinké, the Poular, the Sérèr, the Soninké and the Wolof. The motto of the Republic of Senegal is: “One People, One Goal, One Faith.” The flag of the Republic is composed of three equal, vertical bands of green, gold and red color. In the center of the gold band, there is a green five-pointed star. The law determines the seal and the hymn of the Republic. The principle of the Republic is: government of the people, by the people, and for the people. Article 2. The Capital of the Republic of Senegal is Dakar. It can be transferred to any other location of the national territory. Article 3. National Sovereignty belong to the Senegalese people, who exercise it by their representatives or by way of referendum. No section of the people nor any individual can attribute to itself the exercise of sovereignty. Suffrage can be direct or indirect. It is always universal, equal, and secret. All Senegalese nationals, of both sexes, who are 18 years old, (and) enjoy their civil and political rights, are electors under the conditions determined by law. Article 4. The political parties concur with the expression of suffrage. They are held to respect the Constitution as well as the principles of national sovereignty and of democracy. They are forbidden from identifying themselves to a race, to an ethnicity, to a sex, to a religion, to a sect, to a language or to a region. The conditions under which the political parties are formed, exercise and cease their activities are determined by law.

Article 5. Any act of racial, ethnic, or religious discrimination, as well as any regionalist propaganda which carries affects to the internal security of the State or to the territorial integrity of the Republic, are punished by law. Article 6. The institutions of the Republic are: — The President of the Republic and the Government; — The National Assembly; — The Constitutional Council, the Council of State, the Court of Cassation, the Court of Accounts and the Courts and Tribunals. TITLE II THE PUBLIC FREEDOMS AND (FREEDOMS) OF THE HUMAN PERSON, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL AND COLLECTIVE RIGHTS Article 7. The human person is sacred. It is inviolable. The State has the obligation to respect and protect it. Every individual has the right to life, to security and the free development of his or her personality, corporal integrity, especially protection against all physical mutilations. The Senegalese people recognize the existence of inviolable and inalienable human rights of all human community, of peace and of justice in the world. All human beings are equal before the law. There is in Senegal no subject, no privilege of birth, person or family. Article 8. The Republic of Senegal guarantees to all citizens fundamental individual freedoms, economic and social rights as well as the collective rights. These freedoms are in particular civil and political freedoms: freedom of opinion, freedom of association, freedom of assembly, freedom of movement, freedom of manifestation, the cultural freedoms, the religious freedoms, the philosophical freedoms, the syndical freedoms, the freedom of enterprise, the right to education, the right to know how to read and write, the right of property, the right to work, the right to health, right to a sound environment, the right to plural information. These freedoms and these rights are exercised within the conditions provided by law.

Article 9. All attacks on freedoms, all interference with the exercise of a freedom are punished by law. Nobody can be sentenced except by virtue of a law which entered into force before the act was committed. The defense is an absolute right at all stages and levels of procedure. Article 10. Everyone has the right of expression and to disseminate his opinion by word, pen or image, peaceful march, provided that the exercise of these rights does not attack the honor and the consideration of others, nor the public order. Article 11. The creation of a press organ for political, economic, cultural, sports, social, recreative and scientific information is free and not subject to previous censorship. The press regime is regulated by law. Article 12. All citizens have the right to freely constitute associations, economic, cultural and social groups as well as societies on the condition that they conform to the formalities stipulated by the laws and regulations. The groups whose goal or activity is contrary to the penal laws, or directed against the public order, are prohibited. Article 13. The secrecy of correspondence (and) of postal, telegraphic, telephonic and electronic communications is inviolable. No restriction can be ordered to this inviolability, except in application of a law. Article 14. All citizens of the Republic have the right to move and to settle freely anywhere on the territory or abroad. These freedoms are (to be) exercised under conditions specified by law. Article 15. The right of ownership is guaranteed by the present Constitution. It can only be encumbered in case of legally stated public necessity. Men and women have the right of equal access to possession and to land ownership under conditions determined by law.

Article 16. The domicile is inviolable. It cannot be searched except by an order of a judge or by other authorities designated by the law. Searches can only be executed in the forms specified by them. Measures affecting the inviolability of the domicile or restricting it can only be taken to ward off a collective danger or to protect persons in danger of death. These measures may equally be taken, in application of the law, to protect the public order against imminent threats, especially to fight against the risks of epidemic or to protect youth in danger. MARRIAGE AND THE FAMILY Article 17. Marriage and the family constitute the natural and moral basis of the human community. They are placed under the protection of the State. The State and the public collectivities have the duty to watch over the physical and moral health of the family, in particular the handicapped and aged persons. The State guarantees to families, in general, and to those living in a rural environment, in particular, access to services of health and well being. It guarantees equally to women in general and to those living in rural environment, in particular, the right to alleviation of their living conditions. Article 18. The forced marriage is a violation of individual freedom. It is forbidden and punishable under conditions fixed by law. Article 19. The woman has the right to patrimony (equally) as her husband. She has the right to the personal management of her belongings. Article 20. The parents have the natural right and the duty to bring up their children. They are sustained in this task by the State and the public collectivities against exploitation, drugs, narcotics, moral neglect and delinquency. EDUCATION Article 21. The State and the public collectivities create the preliminary conditions and the public institutions which guarantee the education of children.

Article 22. The State has the duty and the task of education and the formation of youth by public schools. All children, boys and girls, in all places of the national territory have the right of admission to the school. The institutions and the religious communities are equally recognized as means of education. All national institutions, public and private, have the duty to eliminate illiteracy (among) their members and to participate in the national effort to eliminate illiteracy in one of the national languages. Article 23. Private schools may be opened with the authorization and under the control of the State. RELIGIOUS AND RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES Article 24. The freedom of conscience, the freedoms and the religious and cultural practices, the profession of the religious educator are guaranteed, subject to the public order. The institutions, the religious committees have the right to develop themselves without hindrance. They are detached from the tutelage of the State. They regulate and administer their affairs in an autonomous manner. WORK Article 25. Everyone has the right to work and the right to seek employment. No one may be impeded in his work, by reason of his origins, his sex, opinions, political choices or beliefs. The worker may belong to a labor union and defend his rights through union action. All discrimination between men and women in employment, salary and dues is prohibited. The freedom to create labor or professional associations is recognized to all workers. The right to strike is recognized. It is exercised within the set of applicable laws. It cannot, in any case, have an impact on the freedom of work or imperil the enterprise. Every worker participates through intermediary of his delegates in the determination of working conditions in the enterprise. The State watches the sanitary and human conditions of work in the places of work. Specific laws establish the conditions of assistance and protection which the State and the enterprise accord to the workers.

TITLE III THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Article 26. The President of the Republic is elected by direct universal suffrage and by majority vote in two rounds. Article 27. The duration of the mandate of the President of the Republic is five years. The mandate is renewable only one time. This provision cannot be revised except by a referendary or constitutional law. Article 28. The candidate for the Presidency of the Republic must be exclusively of Senegalese nationality, possessing his civil and political rights, be at least 35 years on the day of election. He must know how to write, read and speak fluently in the official language. Article 29. The candidatures are filed with the recorder of the Constitutional Council, at least thirty full days and, at the most, sixty full days before the first round of balloting. However, in case of death of a candidate, the filing of new candidatures is possible at all times until the eve of the balloting. In such case the elections are rescheduled for a new date by the Constitutional Council. Any candidature to be receivable, must be presented by a legally constituted political party or by a coalition of political parties or be accompanied by the signature(s) of electors representing at least ten thousand (voters) domiciled in six regions in proportion to at least five hundred per region. The independent candidates, like the political parties, are bound to conform themselves to Article 4 of the Constitution. Each party or coalition of political parties can present only one candidate. Article 30. Twenty-nine full days before the first round of balloting, the Constitution Council halts and publishes the list of candidates. The electors are convoked by decree. Article 31. The ballot for the election of the President of the Republic takes place forty-five full day at most and thirty full days at least before the expiration of the mandate of the President

of the Republic in office. If the Presidency is vacant, due to resignation, definitive incapacity or death, the ballot shall be held within at least sixty full days at most and twenty-eight days, at the least, after the certification of the vacancy by the Constitutional Council. Article 32. The Courts and Tribunals watch over the regularity of the electoral campaign and to the equality of candidates in the utilization of the means of propaganda under the conditions determined by an organic law. Article 33. The ballot takes place on a Sunday. The candidate having obtained the absolute majority of the suffrage expressed is elected at the first round. If no candidate has obtained the absolute majority, a second round of balloting follows the second Sunday following that of the first round. Only the two candidates having led the first round are admitted to present themselves in the second round. In the case of contestation the second round shall take place the second Sunday following the day of the pronouncement of the decision of the Constitutional Council. At the second round, a relative majority suffices for election. Article 34. In case of death, definitive incapacity, or withdrawal by one of two candidates between the decree of publication of the list of candidates and the first ballot, the organization of the election is entirely replaced by a new list of candidates. In case of death, definitive incapacity, or the withdrawal of one of the two candidates between the first round of balloting and the provisional proclamation of the results, or between this provisional proclamation and the definitive proclamation of the results of the first round of balloting by the Constitutional Council, the candidate in successive order is admitted to present himself for the second round. In case of death, definitive incapacity, or the withdrawal of one of the two candidates, between the proclamation of the definitive results of the first round of balloting and the balloting of the second round, the candidate following on the list of results of the first round is admitted to the second round. In the two preceding cases, the Constitutional Court takes note of death, definitive incapacity, or the withdrawal of one of the two candidates, who arrived on top, according to the provisional results of the second round, and before the proclamation of the definitive results of the second round by the Constitutional Council, the single remaining candidate is declared elected.

Article 35. The Courts and Tribunals watch over the regularity of balloting under the conditions determined by an organic law. The regularity of electoral operations may be contested by one of the candidates, before the Constitutional Council within the seventy-two hours that follow the provisional proclamation of the results by a national commission for the counting of votes instituted by an organic law. If no contestation has been filed within this period with the recorder of the Constitutional Council, the Council immediately proclaims the definitive results of the balloting. In the case of contestation, the Council decides on the claim, within the five full days from the filing of it. Its decision leads to the definitive proclamation of the ballot or the annulment of the election. In the case of annulment, a new round of balloting follows within the twenty-one full days which follow. Article 36. The President-elect of the Republic enters into (his) functions after the definitive proclamation of his election and upon the expiration of the mandate of his predecessor. The incumbent President of the Republic remains in office until the installation of his successor. In the case when the President-elect dies, is found definitively incapacitated, or renounces the benefit of his election before entering into (his) functions, a new election is held under the terms specified by Article 31. Article 37. The President of the Republic is installed in his functions after having taken the oath before the Constitutional Council in public meeting. The oath is taken in the following terms: “Before God and the Senegalese Nation, I swear to faithfully fulfill the charge of the President of the Republic of Senegal, to scrupulously observe and enforce the observance of the provisions of the Constitution and of the laws, to devote all my strength to the defense of the constitutional institutions, the territorial integrity and the national independence, and to spare no effort for the realization of African unity.”

The newly elected president of the Republic makes a written declaration of his assets (which is) deposited with the Constitutional Council, who makes it public. Article 38. The office of the President of the Republic is incompatible with the membership in any elective assembly, the National Assembly or local assemblies, and with the exercise of any remunerative public or private function. However, he has the faculty of exercising functions in a political party or be a member of academies in one of the domains of knowledge. Article 39. In case of resignation, incapacity or death, the President of the Republic is replaced by the President of the National Assembly. In case that he himself shall be in the above case, the replacement is assured by one of the Vice-Presidents of the National Assembly in the order of precedence. The same rule, defined in the preceding article, is applied to all the replacements. In any state of cause, the replacer must fulfill all the conditions specified in Article 28. Article 40. During (the time of) the replacement, the provisions of Articles 49, 51, 86, 87 and 106 are not applicable. Article 41. The resignation, incapacity or death of the President of the Republic are declared by the Constitutional Council, seized by the President of the Republic in case of resignation, by the authority called upon to replace him, in case of incapacity or death. The same applies to the declaration of resignation, incapacity or death of the President of the National Assembly or to persons called upon to replace him. Article 42. The President of the Republic is the guardian of the Constitution. He is the premier protector of the Arts and Letters of Senegal. He embodies national unity. He is the guarantor of the regular functioning of the institutions, the national independence and the integrity of the territory. He determines the policy of the Nation. He presides over the Council of Ministers. Article 43. The President of the Republic signs the ordinances and the decrees. The acts of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those which he accomplishes in virtue of

Articles 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 (1), 52, 74, 76 (2), 78, 79, 83, 89 and 90 are countersigned by the Prime Minister. Article 44. The President of the Republic appoints the civil servants. Article 45. The President of the Republic is responsible for the national defense. He presides over the Superior Council of National Defense and the National Security Council. He is the Supreme Commander of the Armies; he appoints military employees and disposes of the armed force. Article 46. The President of the Republic accredits all the ambassadors and the extraordinary envoys to the foreign powers. The ambassadors and extraordinary envoys of the foreign powers are appointed to him. Article 47. The President of the Republic has the right of pardon. Article 48. The President of the Republic can address messages to the Nation. Article 49. The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister and ends his functions. On the proposal of the Prime Minister, the President of the Republic appoints the Ministers, establishes their attributions and ends their functions. Article 50. The President of the Republic can delegate, by decree, certain powers to the Prime Minister or to other members of the Government with the exception of powers specified in Articles 42, 46, 47, 49, 51, 52, 72, 73, 87, 89 and 90. He can, furthermore, authorize the Prime Minister to make decisions by decree. Article 51. The President of the Republic can, after having consulted the President of the National Assembly and the Constitutional Council, submit any project of a Constitutional Law to

referendum. He can, on the proposal of the Prime Minister and having consulted the above mentioned authorities, submit any bill to referendum. The Courts and Tribunals watch over the regularities over the operations of referendum. The Constitutional Council proclaims the results. Article 52. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of the national territory, or the execution of international obligations are threatened in a grave and immediate manner, and when the regular functioning of the public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic possesses exceptional powers. He can, after having informed the Nation by a message, take any measure which tends to reestablish the regular functioning of the public powers and the institutions and to ensure the safeguarding of the Nation. He cannot, by virtue of the exceptional powers, proceed to constitutional revision. The National Assembly convenes of full right. It is seized, for ratification, within fifteen days of their promulgation, of the measures of a legislative nature, put into force by the President. The Assembly can amend them, reject them on the occasion of a vote of a law of ratification. These measures become lapsed if the bill of the law of ratification is not deposited with the bureau of the National Assembly within the stated time. It cannot be dissolved during the exercise of exceptional powers. When they are exercised after the dissolution of the National Assembly, the date of the elections, fixed by a dissolution decree, cannot be delayed, except in case of force Majeure declared by the Constitutional Council. TITLE IV THE GOVERNMENT Article 53. The Government comprises the Prime Minister, the Head of the Government and the Ministers. The Government conducts and coordinates the policy of the Nation under the direction of the Prime Minister. He is responsible to the President of the Republic and to the National Assembly under the conditions specified in Articles 85 and 86 of the Constitution. Article 54. The office of a member of the Government is incompatible with a parliamentary mandate or any paid public or private professional activity. The modalities of the application of this article are specified by an organic law. Article 55.

After the nomination, the Prime Minister makes his declaration of general policy before the National Assembly. This declaration is followed by a debate, which may, on the demand of the Prime Minister, provide the basis for a vote of confidence. In case of a vote of confidence, it is accorded by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. Article 56. The Government is a collegial and solidary institution. The resignation or the cessation of functions of the Prime Minister entails the resignation of the entirety of the members of the Government. Article 57. The Prime Minister directs the administration and appoints civil servants, determined by law. He ensures the execution of the laws and has the regulatory power with the exception of the provisions of Article 43 of the Constitution. The regulatory acts of the Prime Minister are countersigned by the members of the Government charged with their execution. The Prime Minister presides over the inter-ministerial councils. He presides over ministerial meeting, or appoints for this purpose a minister. He may delegate certain of his powers to the Ministers. TITLE V ON THE OPPOSITION Article 58. The Constitution guarantees to political parties, which are opposed to the policy of the Government the right to oppose it. The law defines their status and determines their rights and duties. The parliamentary opposition is the one which is represented in the National Assembly by its deputies. TITLE VI THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Article 59. The representative assembly of the Republic of Senegal is named National Assembly. Its members carry the title of deputy of the National Assembly. Article 60. The deputies to the National Assembly are elected by universal direct suffrage. Their mandate is five years. It cannot be abridged except by dissolution of the National Assembly.

The Courts and Tribunals watch over the regularity of the electoral campaign and the balloting in the conditions determined by an organic law. An organic law establishes the number of members of National Assembly, their compensations, the conditions of eligibility, the regime of ineligibilities and their incompatibilities. Any deputy who resigns from his party in the course of the legislature is automatically deprived of his mandate. Article 61. A deputy who resigns from his party is replaced under conditions determined by an organic law. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or judged as the result of opinions expressed by him in the exercise of his functions. No deputy may, during the sessions, be prosecuted or arrested in a criminal or correctional mater without the authorization of the National Assembly. The deputy apprehended in flagrant offense or in flight after the perpetration of a punishable act can be arrested, prosecuted and imprisoned without the authorization of the bureau of the National Assembly. No deputy can, in the interim of session, be arrested except by authorization of the bureau of the National Assembly, save in case of flagrant offense, such as referred to in the previous paragraph, or by a definitive penal condemnation. The prosecution of a deputy or his detention resulting from his prosecution is suspended if the Assembly requests it. The deputy, who is the object of a definitive penal condemnation is removed from the list of deputies of the National Assembly on the demand of the Minister of Justice. Article 62. The internal regulation of the National Assembly determines: — the composition, the rules of the functioning of the bureau, as well as the prerogative of its President, who is elected for the duration of legislature; — the number, the mode of designation, the composition, the role and the competence of its permanent commissions, without prejudice of law, for the Assembly, to create special temporary commissions; — the organization of the administrative services placed under the authority of the President of the Assembly, assisted by an administrative secretary general; — the disciplinary regime of the deputies;

— the different modes of balloting, to the exclusion of those expressly referred to in the Constitution; — in a general manner, all rules having for their object the functioning of the National Assembly within the framework of its constitutional competence. The organic law on the internal regulation cannot be promulgated if the Constitutional Council, obligatorily seized by the President of the Republic, has not declared them to conform with the Constitution. Article 63. With the exception of the date of the opening of the first session of the newly elected Assembly, which is determined by the President of the Republic, the National Assembly establishes the date of the opening and the duration of the ordinary session. These are, however, governed by the following rules: — the first is opened during the second trimester of the year; — the second is opened obligatorily during the first fifteen days of the month of October. The law on finances of the year is examined in the course of the second ordinary session. In case when an ordinary or extraordinary session is closed without the Assembly having fixed the opening date of the next ordinary session, it is established in a timely manner by the bureau of the Assembly. The duration of each ordinary session may not exceed four months. The National Assembly is, otherwise, convened for an order of the determined day either: — by the order of its bureau; — by the written demand of more than half of the members addressed to its President; — by the decision of the President of the Republic only on the proposal of the Prime Minister. However, the duration of each extraordinary session may not exceed fifteen days, except in the case specified in Article 68. The extraordinary sessions are closed as soon as the agenda is exhausted. Article 64. The vote of the deputies is personal. Any imperative mandate is null.

The organic law may authorize, exceptionally, the delegation of the vote. In such case, no one may receive the delegation of more than one vote. Article 65. The National Assembly may delegate to its commission delegations of power to take measures that are in the domain of the law. This delegation is effected by a resolution of the National Assembly of which the President of the Republic is immediately informed. Within the time limits and the competence fixed by the above resolution the commission of delegations makes decisions, which are promulgated as laws. These decisions are presented to the bureau of the National Assembly. In default of having been modified by the National Assembly in the fifteen days of the session, they become definite. Article 66. The sittings of the Assembly are public. Closure is pronounced only exceptionally and for a limited duration. The detailed minutes, as well as the parliamentary documents, are published in the Journal of Debates or in the Official Journal. TITLE V RELATIONS BETWEEN THE LEGISLATIVE POWER AND THE EXECUTIVE POWER Article 67. The National Assembly holds the legislative power. It alone votes the law. The law establishes the rules concerning: — civil rights and the fundamental guarantees accorded to citizens for the exercise of public freedoms; the obligations (sujétions) imposed on citizens and persons and on their property for national defense; — the status of opposition; — nationality, the state and capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, inheritance and gifts; — the determination of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as the penalties applicable to them, the criminal procedure, amnesty, the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the statute of magistrates;

— the establishment, the tax and the modalities of collecting taxes of all kinds, the regime of the issuance of currency; — the electoral regime of the National Assembly and the local assemblies; — the fundamental guarantees accorded to civil and military functionaries of the State; — the general organization of national defense; — the free organization of local collectivities, their competence and their resources; — education; — the regime of property, property rights and civil and commercial obligations, the right of work, syndical right and social security; — the regime of remuneration of the agents of the State. The laws of finance determine the resources and the expenditures of the State under conditions and with the reservations specified by an organic law. The creations and transformations of public employment cannot be undertaken except by laws of finance. The programmatic laws determine the objectives of the economic and social action of the State. The plan is approved by the law. The provisions of this article may be made more specific and completed by an organic law. In addition, the President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Prime Minister, may, because of their social, economic and financial importance, submit to a vote by the National Assembly bills of law relating to matters, other than those enumerated in this article, without resulting in a derogation of the provisions of the second paragraph of Article 76. Article 68. The National Assembly votes the bills of law of finance under the conditions specified by an organic law. The bill of the law of finances of the year, which includes the budget, is deposited with the bureau of the National Assembly at the latest on the day of the opening of the determined session. The National Assembly has sixty days at the most to vote the bill of the law of finances.

If by reason of a ease of force majeure, the President of the Republic has not deposited the bill of the law on finances of the year in a timely manner so that the National Assembly can deal with it before the end of the fixed time, specified in the previous paragraph, the session is, immediately and of right, prolonged until the adoption on the law on finances. If the bill is not voted definitively at the expiration of sixty days specified above, it is put into force by decree, taking into account the amendments voted by the National Assembly and accepted by the President of the Republic. If taking into account the procedure specified above, the law of finances of the year has not yet been put into force before the beginning of the financial year, the President is authorized to reestablish by decree the voted services. The Court of Accounts assists the President of the Republic, the Government and the National Assembly in the control of the execution of the laws of finances. Article 69. The state of siege, like the state of urgency, is decreed by the President of the Republic. The National Assembly convenes by right, if it is not in session. The decree proclaiming a state of siege or a state of urgency ceases to be in force after twelve days, unless the National Assembly, seized by the President of the Republic has authorized the extension. The modalities of the application of the state of siege and the state of urgency are determined by the law. Article 70. The declaration of war is authorized by the National Assembly. The rights and duties of citizens, during the war or in case of invasion or attack of the national territory by forces from the exterior, are the object of an organic law. Article 71. After its adoption, the law is transmitted without delay to the President of the Republic. Article 72. The President of the Republic promulgates the definitely adopted law within eight days which follow the expiration of the time period of recourse specified in Article 74. The time period of promulgation is reduced by half in case of urgency declared by the National Assembly. Article 73.

Within the time period specified for promulgation, the President of the Republic may, by a motivated message, demand of the National Assembly a new deliberation which cannot be refused. The law cannot be voted in second reading unless three-fifths of the members composing the National Assembly pronounce themselves in favor. Article 74. The Constitutional Court may be seized by a recourse in order to declare a law unconstitutional: — by the President of the Republic, within six full days of the transmission to him of the definitely adopted law; — by a number of deputies equal to at least one-tenth of the members of the National Assembly, within six full days which follow its definitive adoption. Article 75. The time period of promulgation is suspended until the end of a second deliberation of the National Assembly or the decision of the Constitutional Council declaring the law to conform to the Constitution. In any case, at the expiration of the constitutional time periods, the promulgation is by right; it is provided by the President of the National Assembly. Article 76. Matters which are not of the legislative domain by virtue of this Constitution have a regulatory character. The texts of legislative form concerning such matters may be modified by decree if the Constitutional Court, at the demand of the President of the Republic, has declared that they have a regulatory character by virtue of the preceding paragraph. Article 77. The National Assembly can by a law empower (habiliter) the President of the Republic to take the measures which are normally of the domain the law. Within the limits of time and competences established by the enabling law, the President of the Republic takes the ordinances which enter in force on their publication but become lapsed if the bill of law of ratification is not presented to the Bureau of the National Assembly before the date established by the enabling law. The Parliament can amend them at the time of the vote (on) the law of ratification. Article 78.

The laws designated as organic by the Constitution are voted and modified by an absolute majority of the members that make up the National Assembly. Articles 65 and 77 are not applicable to organic laws. Article 79. The President of the Republic communicates with the National Assembly by messages, which do not provide an opportunity for any debate. Article 80. The initiation of laws belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and to the Deputies. Article 81. The Prime Minister and the other members of the Government may be heard at any moment by the National Assembly and by its commissions. They can be assisted by their collaborators. Article 82. The President of the Republic, the Deputies and the Senators have the right of amendment. The amendments of the President of the Republic are presented by the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government. The proposals and amendments formulated by the Deputies are not receivable when their adoption has for consequence, either a diminution of public resources, or the creation or aggravation of a public obligation, unless these proposals or amendments have been matched by proposals of compensatory receipts. If the Government demands it, the seized National Assembly pronounces by a single vote on all or part of the text under discussion retaining only the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government. Article 83. If it appears, during the course of the legislative procedure that a proposal or amendment is not of the domain of the law, the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government may oppose the receivability. In the case of disaccord, the Constitutional Council, at the demand of the President of the Republic, of the National Assembly or of the Prime Minister, decides in eight days. Article 84.

The inscription, by priority, on the agenda of the National Assembly of a bill or of a proposal of law or of a declaration of general policy is of right if the President of the Republic or the Prime Minister make it a demand. Article 85. The Deputies may pose to the Prime Minister and to the Other members of the Government who are held to respond to it, written questions and oral questions with or without debate. The questions or the responses which are made to them are not put to a vote. The National Assembly can designate, from its midst, commissions of inquiry. The law determines the conditions of the organization and of the functioning as well as the powers of the commissions of inquiry. Article 86. The Prime Minister may, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, decide to pose a question of confidence in a program or a declaration of general policy. The vote on the question of confidence may not take place until two full days after it has been presented. Confidence is refused by a public vote by the absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly. The refusal entails a collective resignation of the Government. The National Assembly may provoke the resignation of the Government by the vote of a motion of censure. The motion of censure must, on pain of irreceivability, be accompanied by the signatures of one-tenth of the members composing the National Assembly. The vote of censure can only take place two full days after its filing with the bureau of the National Assembly. The motion of censure is voted by public ballot, by an absolute majority of the members composing the National Assembly; only the votes in favor of the motion of censure are counted. If the motion of censure is adopted, the Prime Minister immediately presents the Government to the President of the Republic. A new motion of censure cannot be presented in the course of the same session. Article 87. The President of the Republic may pronounce, by decree, the dissolution of the National Assembly, after consulting its President, when it has adopted a motion of censure in opposition to the Government under the conditions established by Article 75.

TITLE VIII THE JUDICIAL POWER Article 88. The judicial power is independent of the legislative power and the executive power. It is exercised by the Constitutional Council, the Council of State, the Court of Cassation, the Court of Accounts and the Courts and Tribunals. Article 89. The Constitutional Council is comprised of five members having a President, VicePresident and three judges. The duration of their mandates is of six years. The Court is renewable every two years in the proportion of (a raison de) the President or of two members other than the President, in the order which results from the dates of the end of their mandates. The members of the Constitutional Council are appointed by the President of the Republic. The conditions to fulfill in order to be able to be appointed a member of the Constitutional Council before the expiration of their mandate on their demand or for physical incapacity, and under the conditions specified by the organic law. Article 90. The magistrates other than the members of the Constitutional Council and the Court of Accounts are appointed by the President of the Republic after the advice of the Superior Council of the Magistrature. The magistrates of the Court of Accounts are appointed by the President of the Republic after the advice of the Superior Council of the Court of Accounts. The judges are only subject during the exercise of their functions to the authority of the law. Sitting magistrates are irremovable. The competence, organization and the functioning of the Superior Council of the Magistrature as well as the statute of the magistrates are established by an organic law. The competence, organization and the functioning of the Superior Council of the Court of Accounts as well as the statute of the magistrates of the Court of Accounts are established by an organic law. Article 91.

The judicial power is the guardian of the rights and freedoms defined by the Constitution and the law. Article 92. The Constitutional Council takes cognizance of the constitutionality of the laws and of the international obligations, of conflicts of competence between the executive and the legislative, of conflicts of competence between the Council of State and the Court of Cassation, as well as of exceptions of unconstitutionality raised before the Council of State or the Court of Cassation. The decisions of the Constitutional Council are not susceptible of any recourse. They impose themselves on the public powers and on all the administrative and jurisdictional authorities. The Council of State is the judge in first and last resort of abuses of power of the executive authorities. It takes cognizance of the decisions of the Court of Accounts by way of recourse in cassation. It is competent in last resort in the contentions of inscription on the electoral lists and of the elections to the councils of the territorial collectivities. It takes cognizance, by way of the recourse in cassation, of the decisions of the Courts and Tribunals concerning the other contentions-administrative (matters), with the exception of those which the organic law expressly attributes to the Court of Cassation. In all other matters, the Court of Cassation pronounces by way of recourse in cassation on the judgements rendered in last resort by the subordinate jurisdictions. The Court of Accounts judges the public accounts and accountants. It verifies the regularity of the receipts and expenditures and assures the appropriate use of credits, funds, and assets managed by the services of the State or by other moral persons of public law. It assures the verification of accounts and of management of the public enterprises and organisms with public financial participation. It declares and audits the actual management. It sanctions the errors of management committed concerning the State, the local collectivities and the organisms submitted to its control. After recourse, they are binding (elles s’imposent) on public powers and all the administrative and jurisdictional authorities. Article 93. Except in cases of flagrant offense, the members of the Constitutional Council can only be prosecuted, arrested, detailed or judged in a penal matter with the authorization of the Council and under the same conditions as the magistrates of the Council of State and of the Court of Cassation and of the Court of Accounts. Except in the case of flagrant offense, the magistrates of the Council of State and of the Court of Cassation and of the Court of Accounts can only be prosecuted, arrested,

detained or judged in a penal matter under the conditions specified by the organic law concerning the statute of the magistrates. Article 94. The organic laws determine the other competences of the Constitutional Council, of the Council of State and of the Court of Cassation and of the Court of Accounts, as well as their organization, the rules of designation of their members and the procedure to be followed before them. TITLE IX INTERNATIONAL TREATIES Article 95. The President of the Republic negotiates international obligations. He ratifies them or approves them. Article 96. The peace treaties, the commercial treaties, the treaties or agreements relating to international organizations, those which engage the finances of the State, those which modify the provisions of a legislative nature, those which concern the status of persons, (and) those which entail a cession, exchange or acquisition of territory can only be ratified or approved by virtue of a law. They take effect only after they have been ratified or approved. No cession, no annexation of territory is valid without the consent of the population concerned. The Republic of Senegal can conclude with any African State treaties of association or of community including the partial or complete relinquishment of sovereignty with the purpose of realizing the African unity. Article 97. If the Constitutional Council has declared that an international obligation involves a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify it or to approve it can only issue after the revision of the Constitution. Article 98. The treaties or agreements regularly ratified or approved have, on their publication, an authority superior to that of the laws, subject, for each treaty or agreement, to its application by the other party.

TITLE X THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Article 99. A High Court of Justice is instituted. Article 100. The High Court of Justice is composed of members elected by the National Assembly. It is presided over by a magistrate. The organization of the High Court of Justice and the procedure to be followed before it are determined by an organic law. Article 101. The President of the Republic is only responsible for acts accomplished in the exercise of his functions in the case of high treason. He can be impeached only by the National Assembly, declared by secret ballot, by a majority of three-fifths of the members composing it; he is judged by the High Court of Justice. The Prime Minister and the other members of the Government are penally responsible for acts accomplished in the exercise of their functions and qualified (as) crimes or misdemeanors at the time when they were committed. The procedure defined above is applicable to them, as well as to their accomplices, in the case of conspiracy against the security of the State. In the cases specified in the present paragraph, the High Court is bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties, such as they result from the penal laws in force at the moment when the acts were committed. TITLE XI THE LOCAL COLLECTIVITIES Article 102. The local collectivities constitute the institutional framework of the participation of citizens in the management of public affairs. They administer themselves freely by elected councils. Their organization, their composition and their functioning are determined by the law. TITLE XII ON REVISION Article 103.

The initiative for the revision of the Constitution belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic and to the deputies. The Prime Minister can propose to the President of the Republic a revision of the Constitution. The bill or the proposal of revision must be adopted by the National Assembly. The revision is definite after it has been approved by referendum. However, the bill or the proposal are not presented to referendum when the President of the Republic presents them to the National Assembly only. In this case the bill or the proposal is approved if it receives a majority of three-fifths (3/5) of the members composing the National Assembly. The Articles 55 and 77 are not applicable to constitutional laws. The republican form of the State cannot be made the object of revision. TITLE XIII TRANSITORY PROVISIONS Article 104. The current President of the Republic pursues his mandate to (the end) of his term. All other provisions of this Constitution are applicable to him. Article 105. In order to bring about the rapid implementation of the provisions of this Constitution, the President of the Republic is authorized to regroup the maximum of elections in time. To this effect he may pronounce the dissolution of all the councils of the local collectivities. He may in the same way, either pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly, or simply organize the expected elections, without a dissolution. In the latter case, the present National Assembly continues to exercise its functions until the establishment of the new National Assembly. The new National Assembly is convoked by decree. Article 106. The legislative measures that are necessary for establishment of the new National Assembly and the new local assemblies, which follow the adoption of the present Constitution, especially the electoral regime and the composition of these assemblies, are fixed by the actual National Assembly if it is not dissolved. In the contrary case, they are fixed by the President of the Republic, after the advice of the Council of State, by ordinance having the force of law. The time of the convocation of the elections and the duration of the electoral campaign can be shortened. Article 107.

The laws and regulations in force, if they are not contrary to the present Constitution, remain in effect as long as they have not been modified or abrogated. In any case, all the provisions pertaining to the Senate and to the Economic and Social Council are abrogated requiring officially the suppression of these institutions. For the High Audiovisual Council, the President of the Republic is authorized to terminate the functions of the actual members and to proceed, by consent, to the appointment of new members. He may, to the required extent, take all necessary measures to this effect. Article 108. The present Constitution shall be submitted to the people by way of referendum. After the adoption, it shall be published in the Official Journal as Supreme law of the Republic. The adopted Constitution enters into force on the day of its promulgation by the President of the Republic. This promulgation must take place within eight days following the proclamation of the results of the referendum by the Constitutional Council. However, the provisions relative to Titles VI (National Assembly) and VII (The relations between the executive and the legislative power) do not come into force until after the closure of current legislative session.

