THE ROYAL CHARTER OF 1834  
THE ROYAL STATUTE (1834)1  Title I. The Convocation of the General Cortes of the Kingdom. art. 1. In accordance with the provisions of law 5, title XV, part 2, and of laws I and 2, title VII, book VI of the Nueva Recopilacion, Her Majesty, the Queen Regent, in the name of her glorious daughter, Doia Isabel II, has resolved to convoke the general Cortes of the kingdom. art. 2. The general Cortes shall be composed of two estates: Peers (proceres) of the Kingdom and Proctors (procuradores) of the Kingdom.  Title II. The Estate of Peers of the Kingdom. art. 3. The Estate of Peers of the Kingdom shall be composed of: 1) The most reverend archbishops and the reverend bishops; 2) The Grandees of Spain; 3) The Nobles of Castile; 4) An undetermined number of Spaniards of unusual prestige, and illustrious for their services in various careers who have been, or will have been, Secretaries of State. Proctors of the Kingdom, ambassadors or ministers pleni-potentiary, Councillors of State, generals of the land and sea forces or magistrates of the supreme courts; 5) Territorial proprietors or owners of factories, manufacturing or commercial establishments, who add to their personal merit and relevant circumstances, the possession of an annual income of 60,000 reales and previous services as Proctors of the Kingdom; 6) Those who have acquired great renown and celebrity in public education or in the cultivation of the sciences or letters, provided that they receive an annual income of 60,000 reales derived either from their own property, or from salaries paid by the state. art. 4. It shall suffice to be elected as an auxiliary archbishop or bishop, in order to be chosen in that class, and to take a seat in the Estate of Peers of the Kingdom. art. 5. All the Grandees of Spain are hereditary members of the Estate of Peers of the Kingdom, and shall take seats in it, provided that they satisfy the following requirements: 1) Of having attained twenty-five years of age; 2) Of being in possession of Grandeeship by personal right; 3) Of certifying that they receive an annual income of 200,000 reales; 4) Of holding their property without subjection to any kind of intervention; 5) Of not being criminally prosecuted; 6) Of not being subjects of another power; art. 6. The dignity of Peer of the Kingdom is hereditary in the Grandees of Spain. art. 7. The King chooses and appoints the other Peers of the Kingdom whose office is for life. art. 8. The Nobles of Castile, who have been appointed Peers of the Kingdom, must certify that they satisfy the following requirements: 1) Of having attained twenty-five years of age; 2) Of being in possession of the title of Noble of Castile by personal right; 3) Of receiving an annual income of 80,000 reales; 4) Of holding their property without subjection to any kind of intervention; 5) Of not being criminally prosecuted;  6) Of not being subjects of another power; art. 9. The number of Peers of the Kingdom is unlimited. art. 10. The office of Peer of the Kingdom is lost only by legal incapacity by virtue of a sentence imposing infamous punishment. art. 11. A regulation shall determine everything concerning the internal government and the method of deliberation of the Estate of Peers of the Kingdom. art. 12. The King shall choose among the Peers of the Kingdom each time that the Cortes meets, those who are to exercise the functions of President and Vice-President in that session. Title III. The Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom. art. 13. The Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom shall comprise the persons elected according to the electoral law. art. 14. A Proctor of the Kindgom is required: 1) To be a native of this kingdom, or the son of Spanish parents; 2) To have attained thirty years of age; 3) To possess a personal annual income of 12,000 reales; 4) To have been born in the province that elects him, or to have resided in it during the previous two years, or to possess in it some rural or urban property or assessed capital equaling one-half of the necessary income for a Proctor of the Kingdom. In case that the same individual has been elected a Proctorto Cortes for more than one province, he may choose between those that have elected him. art. 15. The following may not be Proctors of the Kingdom: 1) Those who have been criminally prosecuted; 2) Those who have been condemned to infamous punishment by a tribunal; 3) Those who have any notorious physical incapacity of a permanent nature; 4) Merchants declared in a state of bankruptcy or those who have suspended their payments; 5) Proprietors whose property is administered by a receiver; 6) Debtors of the state in the status of "contributory seconds;" art. 16. The Proctors of the Kingdom shall
proceed in conformity with the powers provided them at the time of their election within the limits fixed by the royal convocation. art. 17. The terms of the powers of the Proctors of the Kingdom shall be three years, unless before the expiration of this time, the King will have dissolved the Cortes. art. 18. When new elections are held, either from lapse of powers, or from dissolution of the Cortes by the King, those who have been Proctors of the Kingdom may be re-elected, provided that they continue to satisfy the conditions required by law. Title IV. The Assembly of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom. art. 19. The Proctors of the Kingdom shall convene in the city designated by the royal convocation for the meeting of the Cortes. art. 20. The regulation of the Cortes shall determine the form and rules to be observed in the presentation and examination of powers. art. 21. After the powers of the Proctors of the Kingdom have been approved, the Proctors shall choose five from their own number so that the King may designate two of the five nominees for the discharge of the duties of President and Vice-President art. 22. The President and Vice-President of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom shall cease to exercise their duties when the King suspends or dissolves the Cortes. art. 23. A regulation shall determine everything concerning the internal government and the manner of deliberation of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom. Title V. General Dispositions. art. 24. The power of convoking, suspending, and dissolving the Cortes belongs exclusively to the King. art. 25. The Cortes shall convene by virtue of royal convocation in the city and on the day designated therein. art. 26. The King shall open and close the Cortes either in person or through the medium of Secretaries of State, especially authorized to this effect by a decree, signed by the President of the Council of Ministers. art. 27. In accordance with law 5, title XV, partida 2, the general Cortes shall  be convoked after the death of the King so that his successor in its presence may receive from the Cortes the oath of fidelity and obedience due him. art. 28. Likewise, the general Cortes of the Kingdom shall be convoked, by virtue of the law cited above, when the prince or princess who has inherited the crown is a minor. art. 29. In the case expressed in the preceding article, the guardians of the minor King shall swear to supervise faithfully the custody of the prince, and not to violate the laws of the state; they shall receive from the Peers and Proctors of the Kingdom, the proper oath of fidelity and obedience. art. 30. In accordance with law 2, title VII, book VI of the Nueva Recopilacion, the Cortes of the Kingdom shall be convoked when there arises some arduous business whose gravity, in the judgment of the King, demands consulting them. art. 31. The Cortes may not deliberate on any matter which has not been expressly submitted to their examination by a royal decree. art. 32. However there remains fixed the right that the Cortes has always exercised, of submitting petitions to the King; the petitions shall be drawn up in the manner and form prescribed by the regulation. art. 33. The formation of laws requires the consent of both estates and the royal sanction. art. 34. In accordance with law I, title VII, book VI, of the Nueva Recopilacion, no tributes or taxes of any kind may be demanded unless the Cortes, upon royal proposal, has voted them. art. 35. Taxes may not be imposed for a term exceeding two years; before the expiration of this time, they must be voted again by the Cortes. art. 36. Before the Cortes votes the taxes to be imposed, there shall be presented to it, by the respective Secretaries of State, an exposition showing the condition of the various branches of the public administration; the minister of finance must present to the Cortes the estimate of the expenses and the means of meeting them. art. 37. The King may suspend the Cortes by virtue of a decree countersigned by the President of the Council of Ministers, and when it is read, both Estates

proceed in conformity with the powers provided them at the time of their election within the limits fixed by the royal convocation. art. 17. The terms of the powers of the Proctors of the Kingdom shall be three years, unless before the expiration of this time, the King will have dissolved the Cortes. art. 18. When new elections are held, either from lapse of powers, or from dissolution of the Cortes by the King, those who have been Proctors of the Kingdom may be re-elected, provided that they continue to satisfy the conditions required by law. Title IV. The Assembly of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom. art. 19. The Proctors of the Kingdom shall convene in the city designated by the royal convocation for the meeting of the Cortes. art. 20. The regulation of the Cortes shall determine the form and rules to be observed in the presentation and examination of powers. art. 21. After the powers of the Proctors of the Kingdom have been approved, the Proctors shall choose five from their own number so that the King may designate two of the five nominees for the discharge of the duties of President and Vice-President art. 22. The President and Vice-President of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom shall cease to exercise their duties when the King suspends or dissolves the Cortes. art. 23. A regulation shall determine everything concerning the internal government and the manner of deliberation of the Estate of Proctors of the Kingdom. Title V. General Dispositions. art. 24. The power of convoking, suspending, and dissolving the Cortes belongs exclusively to the King. art. 25. The Cortes shall convene by virtue of royal convocation in the city and on the day designated therein. art. 26. The King shall open and close the Cortes either in person or through the medium of Secretaries of State, especially authorized to this effect by a decree, signed by the President of the Council of Ministers. art. 27. In accordance with law 5, title XV, partida 2, the general Cortes shall  be convoked after the death of the King so that his successor in its presence may receive from the Cortes the oath of fidelity and obedience due him. art. 28. Likewise, the general Cortes of the Kingdom shall be convoked, by virtue of the law cited above, when the prince or princess who has inherited the crown is a minor. art. 29. In the case expressed in the preceding article, the guardians of the minor King shall swear to supervise faithfully the custody of the prince, and not to violate the laws of the state; they shall receive from the Peers and Proctors of the Kingdom, the proper oath of fidelity and obedience. art. 30. In accordance with law 2, title VII, book VI of the Nueva Recopilacion, the Cortes of the Kingdom shall be convoked when there arises some arduous business whose gravity, in the judgment of the King, demands consulting them. art. 31. The Cortes may not deliberate on any matter which has not been expressly submitted to their examination by a royal decree. art. 32. However there remains fixed the right that the Cortes has always exercised, of submitting petitions to the King; the petitions shall be drawn up in the manner and form prescribed by the regulation. art. 33. The formation of laws requires the consent of both estates and the royal sanction. art. 34. In accordance with law I, title VII, book VI, of the Nueva Recopilacion, no tributes or taxes of any kind may be demanded unless the Cortes, upon royal proposal, has voted them. art. 35. Taxes may not be imposed for a term exceeding two years; before the expiration of this time, they must be voted again by the Cortes. art. 36. Before the Cortes votes the taxes to be imposed, there shall be presented to it, by the respective Secretaries of State, an exposition showing the condition of the various branches of the public administration; the minister of finance must present to the Cortes the estimate of the expenses and the means of meeting them. art. 37. The King may suspend the Cortes by virtue of a decree countersigned by the President of the Council of Ministers, and when it is read, both Estates
shall be dismissed without power to reassemble or to deliberate, or to make resolutions. art. 38. If the King suspends the Cortes, it may not re-assemble except by virtue of royal convocation. art. 39. On the day designated for the reassembling of the Cortes, the same Proctors of the Kingdom shall present themselves unless the term of three years of duration of their powers will have been fulfilled. art. 40. When the King dissolves the Cortes, he must do so in person or by means of a decree, countersigned by the President of the Council of Ministers. art. 41. In both cases both Estates shall be dismissed immediately. art. 42. After the announcement of the dissolution of the Cortes by royal order, the Estate of Peers of the Kingdom may not re-assemble or deliberate or make resolutions until the Cortes is reconvened by virtue of royal convocation. art. 43. After the announcement of the dissolution of the Cortes by royal order, the powers of the Proctors are annulled in the same act. All of their acts and resolutions thereafter are null and void. art. 44. If the Cortes has been dissolved, another Cortes must be assembled before the end of the year. art. 45. Whenever the Cortes is convoked, both Estates shall be convoked at the same time. art. 46. Neither Estate may be assembled without the other. art. 47. Each Estate shall celebrate its sessions in a separate chamber. art. 48. The sessions of both Estates shall be public except in the cases which the regulation shall designate. art. 49. Both the Peers and Proctors of the Kingdom shall be inviolable for their opinions and votes in the exercise of their duties. art. 50. The regulation of the Cortes shall determine the relations of both Estates to each other and to the government.

