CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

EDITED AND WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

Albert

P. B laustein
Jay A. Sigler

PARAGON HOUSE PUBLISHERS New York

	 First edition Published in the United States by Paragon House Publishers 90 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10011 Copyright © 1988 by Albert P. Blaustein and Jay A. Sigler Published in cooperation with the Centre de Recherches pour le Droit Constitutionnel, Fribourg, Switzerland. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form, without written permission from the publisher, unless by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Constitutions that made history / edited by Albert P. Blaustein, Jay A. Sigler.-1st ed. p. cm. ISBN 0-913729-67-I I. Constitutions. I. Blaustein, Albert P., 1921– II. Sigler, Jay A. K3157.E5C67 1988 87-19381 342'.023—dc19 CIP [34 2 .2 23 ]

Swinish Constitution of 1812

	

1 17

POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE SPANISH NATION PROCLAIMED IN CADIZ, 19 MARCH, 1812
PREAM LE

In the name of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Author and Supreme Legislator of society: The general and extraordinary Cortes of the Spanish nation, well convinced, after very close examination and mature deliberation, that the ancient fundamental laws of the monarchy, accompanied by the opportune provisions and precautions which assure their entire fulfillment in a stable and permanent manner, will worthily achieve the great object of promoting the glory, prosperity, and welfare of the entire nation, decree the following political constitution for the good government and just administration of the state.

TITLE I. THE SPANISH NATION AN

P

SPANIARDS

CHAPTER I. THE SPANISH NATION

Article .r. The Spanish nation consists of all Spaniards in both hemiArticle 2. The Spanish nation is free and independent, and is not, nor can it be, the patrimony of any family or person. Article 3. Sovereignty resides essentially in the nation, and therefore the right of establishing its fundamental laws belong to it exclusively. Article 4. The nation is obliged to preserve and protect by just and wise laws, the civil liberty, the property, and the other legitimate rights of all individuals belonging to it.
CHAPTER II. SPANIARDS

spheres.

Article 5. The following are Spaniards:

I) All free men born and resident in Spanish dominions and their children;
From Manual of Spanish Constitutions, 1808-1931. Edited by Arnold Verduin (Ypsilanti, Michigan: University Lithoprinters, 1941).

118

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

2) Foreigners who have obtained certificates of naturalization from the Cortes; 3) Foreigners who, without such certificate, reside ten years in a district, may obtain it, according to law, in any town of the monarchy; 4) Freedmen as soon as they obtain their liberty in Spain. Article 6. Love of his country is one of the principal obligations of all Spaniards, as well as justice and beneficence. Article 7. Every Spaniard is bound to be faithful to the constitution, to obey the laws, and to respect established authorities. Article 8. Every Spaniard is likewise bound, without any distinction, to contribute in proportion to his means, to the expenses of the state. Article 9. Every Spaniard is also bound to defend his fatherland by bearing arms when called upon by law.

TITLE II. THE TERRITORY OF SPAIN, ITS RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT, AND SPANISH CITIZENS
CHAPTER I. THE TERRITORY OF SPAIN

Article 10. Spanish territory in the peninsula with its possessions and adjacent islands comprises: Aragon, Asturias, Old Castile, New Castile, Catalonia, Cordova, Extremadura, Galicia, Granada, Jaen, Leon, Molina, Murcia, Navarre, the Basque Provinces, Seville and Valencia, the Canary and Balearic Islands, with other possessions in Africa. In North America, it comprises New Spain with New Galicia, the peninsula of Yucatan, Guatemala, the internal eastern and western provinces, the island of Cuba, the two Floridas, the Spanish part of the island of Santo Domingo, the island of Puerto-Rico, and the islands adjacent thereto and to the continent in both oceans. In South America it comprises New Granada, Venezuela, Peru, Chile, the provinces of the Plata River, and all the islands adjacent in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. In Asia it comprises the Philippine Islands and their dependencies. Article II. A more convenient division of Spanish territory shall be made by a constitutional law as soon as the political circumstances of the nation permit.
CHAPTER II. RELIGION

Article 12. The religion of the Spanish nation is, and shall be perpetually, Apostolic Roman Catholic, the only true religion. The nation protects it by wise and just laws and prohibits the exercise of any other, whatsoever.

Spanish Constitution of 1812	

119

CHAPTER III. GOVERNMENT

Article 13. The object of the government is the happiness of the nation since the end of all political society is only the well being of the individuals who compose it. Article 14. The government of the Spanish nation is a limited, hereditary monarchy. Article 15. The power of making laws reside in the Cortes and the King. Article 16. The power of executing laws resides in the King. Article 17. The power of applying laws in civil and criminal cases resides in the courts established by law.
CHAPTER IV. SPANISH CITIZENS

Article 18. Those are Spanish citizens who, in both family lines, trace their origin to the Spanish dominions in both hemispheres, and are resident in some town of the dominions. Article 19. That foreigner is also a citizen who, already enjoying the rights of a Spaniard, obtains a special certificate of citizenship from the Cortes. Article 20. In order that the foreigner may obtain such special certificate from the Cortes, he must have married a Spanish woman, and have brought into, and established in, Spain some invention or valuable industry, or have acquired property on which he pays a direct tax, or have established himself in trade with an adequate and considerable capital, in the judgment of the Cortes, or have performed distinguished services for the welfare and defense of the nation. Article 21. Those also are citizens who are the legitimate children of foreigners resident in Spain who, born in Spanish dominions, have never left them without the permission of the government, and having attained twenty-one years of age, have resided in a town of the same dominions, pursuing in it some profession, office or useful industry. Article 22. The channels of virtue and merit are left open for Spaniards reputed of African origin on either side to attain citizenship; consequently, the Cortes shall grant a certificate of citizenship to those who may perform reasonable services for the fatherland, or those who distinguish themselves by their talents, diligence, and good conduct, on condition that they are children in lawful marriage of fathers naturally free, that they are married to a woman naturally free, that they are settled in the Spanish dominions, and pursue some profession, office or useful industry with adequate capital. Article 23. Only citizens may obtain municipal offices and vote for them in the cases designated by law. Article 24. Spanish citizenship is lost by:

120

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

I) Naturalization in a foreign country; 2) Receiving employment under another government; 3) Any sentence imposing severe or infamous penalties so long as it is unrevoked; 4) Residence for five consecutive years outside of Spanish territory without a commission or permit from the government. Article 25. The exercise of the same rights is suspended: I) By virtue of any judicial prohibition because of moral or physical incapacity; 2) In case of bankruptcy or indebtedness to the public treasury; 3) In the status of domestic servitude; 4) From failure to have any employment, office, or known means of living; 5) From having undergone criminal prosecution. 6) From the year 1830, all those who enter upon the rights of citizenship must be able to read and write. Article 26. The rights of citizenship may be lost or suspended only for the reasons designated in the two preceding articles, and for no other reasons. TITLE III. THE CORTES
CHAPTER I. THE MANNER OF FORMING THE CORTES

Article 27. The Cortes is the assembly of all the Deputies who represent the nation, elected by the citizens in the manner given below. Article 28. The basis for national representation is the same in both hemispheres. Article 29. This basis is the population consisting of the natives who, on both sides, have originated in Spanish dominions and of those who have received a certificate of citizenship from the Cortes as well as those comprehended in art. 21. Article 30. The last census of the year 1797, shall serve for the computation of the population of the dominions in Europe, until a new one can be taken, and a corresponding census shall be made for the computation of the population of the overseas dominions, using, in the meantime, the most authentic census of those recently taken. Article 31. There shall be a Deputy to the Cortes for every 70,000 souls of population, composed according to the explanation in art. 29. Article 32. After the population has been distributed among the several provinces, if an excess beyond 35,00o souls appears, another Deputy shall be elected as though the number amounted to 7o,000; if the excess does not pass 35,000, it shall be ignored.

Spanish Constitution of 1812	

121

Article 33. Should there be any province whose population does not amount to 70,00o souls but which is not under 6o,000, it shall elect a Deputy; if there are less than 60,000 souls, the province shall be united to the one adjoining, to complete the requisite number of 70,000. Excepted from this rule is the island of Santo Domingo which shall elect a Deputy, regardless of its population.
CHAPTER II. THE ELECTION OF DEPUTIES TO CORTES

Article 34. For the election of Deputies parish, district, and provincial meetings shall be held.
CHAPTER III. THE PARISH ELECTORAL MEETINGS

Article 35. The parish electoral meetings shall be composed of all citizens settled and resident in the respective parish, including secular ecclesiastics. Article 36. These meetings shall always be held in the Spanish peninsula, the islands, and the adjoining possessions on the first Sunday in October of the year before that of the meeting of the Cortes. Article 37. In the overseas provinces they shall be held on the first Sunday in December, fifteen months before the meeting of the Cortes; the magistrates shall always give previous notice for both. Article 38. The parish meeting shall choose one parish elector for each 200 inhabitants. Article 39. If the number of inhabitants in the parish exceeds 30o but does not amount to 400, two electors shall be chosen; if the number exceeds 500 but does not amount to 60o, three shall be chosen, and thus progressively. Article 40. In parishes whose number of inhabitants does not amount to 200, but exceeds 150, one elector shall be chosen; and in those that have not 15o inhabitants, the residents shall be united with those of the next adjoining parish in order to choose the elector or electors, according to their numbers. Article 41. The parish meeting shall elect by a majority of votes, eleven commissioners to nominate the parish elector. Article 42. If two parish electors are to be chosen in the meeting, twenty-one commissioners shall be chosen; if three, thirty-one; but in no case shall the last number be exceeded, in order to save confusion. Article 43. For the greater convenience of small places, it shall be observed that parishes containing twenty inhabitants shall elect one commissioner; those containing from thirty to forty shall elect two, those containing from fifty to sixty shall elect three, and thus progressively. Parishes

122

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

containing less than twenty shall unite with the next nearest parish to elect commissioners. Article 44. Commissioners of small places thus elected, shall meet in the most convenient towns, and numbering eleven, or at least nine, shall choose a parish elector; numbering twenty-one or at least seventeen, shall choose two electors; numbering thirty-one, or at least twentyfive, shall choose three electors or the electors according to their numbers. Article 45. To become a parish elector, one must be a citizen, above twenty-five years of age, settled and resident in the parish. Article 46. The parish meetings shall be presided over by the principal civil official or the magistrate (alcalde) of the city, town or village where the meeting is held; the parish curate shall attend in order to give greater solemnity to the election; and if one town holds two or more meetings because of the number of parishes, one shall be presided over by the principal civil officer or the magistrate, another by the other magistrate, and the other meetings by the alderman, chosen by lot. Article 47. The voters, assembled in the town hall or in the customary place, at the hour appointed shall proceed to the parish church, headed by the president; there a solemn mass to the Holy Ghost shall be celebrated by the parish priest, who shall deliver an address suitable to the occasion. Article 48. After mass, they shall return to their meeting place, and the meeting shall be opened there with the appointment of two inspectors and a secretary from among those present; all this shall be in open session. Article 49. Then the president shall ask whether any voter has a complaint to make relative to bribery or corruption in order to elect any particular person; if there is, a public and verbal accusation must be made. If the charge is proved, those who have offended shall be deprived of their suffrage. Calumniators shall suffer the same penalty, and no recourse is allowed from this judgment. Article 5o. Should any doubts arise concerning the qualifications of those who are to vote, the meeting shall decide on them straightway, and its decisions shall be executed without recourse for this instance and for this effect. Article 51. The election of commissioners shall follow, each voter designating the number of persons equal to that of the commissioners required; for that purpose he shall go to the table placed before the president, the inspectors, and the secretary, and the latter shall write the names in a list in the voter's presence; no voter shall inscribe his own name on the list of candidates in any election on pain of losing the right to vote. Article 52. When this has been done, the president, the inspectors and the secretary shall inspect the lists; the president shall announce in an audible voice the names of the citizens who, by a majority of votes, have been elected commissioners. Article 53. Before the adjournment of the meeting, the commissioners

Spanish Constitution of

1812	

123

elected shall withdraw to a private room and, in conference there, shall choose the elector or electors for the parish; the person or persons obtaining more than one-half of the votes, shall be elected, and the election shall be published in the meeting immediately. Article 54. The secretary shall make a record thereof, which shall be signed by the president and the commissioners, and a copy similarly signed shall be delivered to the person or persons elected, as evidence of their election. Article 55. No citizen may excuse himself from these duties under any pretext or reason. Article 56. No citizen may present himself at the parish meeting bearing arms. Article 57. After the verification of the selection of electors, the meeting shall be adjourned immediately. Every other act shall be null and void. Article 58. The members of the meeting shall proceed to the parish church wherein a solemn Te Deum shall be sung. The elector or electors shall be placed among the president, inspectors, and secretary.
CHAPTER IV. DISTRICT ELECTOR MEETINGS

Article 59. The district electoral meetings shall be composed of the parish electors who shall assemble in the chief town of the district in order to choose the elector or electors who shall proceed, when they have assembled in the provincial capital, to the election of Deputies to the Cortes. Article 6o. In the peninsula and adjacent islands, these meetings shall always be held on the first Sunday of November in the year preceding the opening of a new Cortes. Article 6i. . In the overseas provinces, they shall be held on the first Sunday of January following the parish electoral meetings held in December. Article 62. In order to ascertain the number of electors to be chosen by each district, the following regulations shall be observed. Article 63. The number of district electors shall be three times as great as the number of Deputies to be elected. Article 64. If the number of districts in the province should be greater than the number of electors required by the previous article for the election of Deputies, nevertheless, each district shall have one elector. Article 65. If the number of districts be less than that of the electors, each district shall elect one, two, or more to complete the required number; but if one elector be still lacking, the district with the largest population shall elect him; if two be needed the next most populous district shall elect the second, and so on progressively. Article 66. In conformity with the provisions in articles 31, 32, 33, and articles 63, 64, 65, the census shall determine the number of Deputies

124

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

belonging to each province and the number of electors for each district. Article 67. The district electoral meetings shall be presided over by the principal civil officer or by the first magistrate of the chief town of the district, to whom the parish electors shall present themselves with the documents authenticating their election, so that their names may be inscribed in the record book of the meeting. Article 68. On the appointed day, the parish electors shall assemble with their president in the consistorial hall in open session; they shall proceed to the appointment of a secretary and two inspectors, from among their own number. Article 69. Then the electors shall present their certificate of election for examination by the secretary and the inspectors, who shall report on the following day whether the certificates are in order. The certificates of the secretary and of the inspectors shall be examined by a commission of three members of the meeting, appointed for this purpose; the latter shall report on the following day. Article 7o. On the same day, the parish electors being assembled, the reports on the certificates shall be read, and if there is an objection to the certificates or to the electors because of lack of necessary qualifications, the meeting shall decide the matter in the same sitting; the decision shall be executed without recourse. Article 71. After this act, the parish electors, headed by their president, shall proceed to the principal church, where a solemn mass to the Holy Ghost shall be sung by the highest ecclesiastical dignitary of the district; the latter shall give a discourse appropriate to the circumstances. Article 72. After divine service, they shall return to the consistorial hall and shall take seats without any preference; the secretary shall read this chapter of the constitution, and the president shall put the question contained in article 49 and every particular of its contents shall be observed. Article 73. Immediately afterward, they shall proceed to the selection of one or more district electors; the latter shall be chosen singly by secret ballot, using votes upon which is written the name of the person whom each elector nominates. Article 74. After the balloting, the president, secretary, and inspectors shall count the votes and he shall be elected who receives one more than one half the votes cast; the president shall announce each election. If no one has a majority of votes, the two receiving the highest number of votes in the second balloting shall be elected. In case of a tie, it shall be decided by drawing lots. Article 75. To become a district elector, one must be a citizen in full exercise of his rights, above twenty-five years of age, a resident of the district, either a layman or one of the secular clergy. The election may fall upon citizens either in or out of the meeting. Article 76. The secretary shall make a record of the proceedings, which

Spanish Constitution of 1812	

125

shall be signed by the president and the inspectors; a copy similarly signed shall be given to the person or persons elected as evidence of their election. The president of this meeting shall deliver another copy signed by himself and by the secretary to the president of the provincial meeting who shall publish the election in the public papers. Article 77. All the provisions for parish electoral meetings prescribed in article 55, 56, 57, and 58 shall be observed in the district electoral meetings.
CHAPTER V. THE PROVINCIAL ELECTORAL MEETINGS

Article 78. The provincial electoral meetings shall be composed of all the district electors of the province who shall assemble in its capital to elect the respective number of Deputies in the Cortes as representatives of the nation. Article 79. In the peninsula and adjacent islands, these meetings shall be held on the first Sunday of December of the year preceding the opening of the new Cortes. Article 80. In the overseas provinces they shall be held on the second Sunday of March of the same year in which the district meetings are held. Article 81. They shall be presided over by the governor of the province to whom the district electors shall present themselves with the documents of their election so that their names may be inscribed in the record book of the meeting. Article 82. On the appointed day the district electors shall meet with their president in the consistorial hall or in the building most suitable for the solemnity of the proceedings, in open session; they shall proceed to select by a majority of votes, a secretary, and two inspectors from among their own numbers. Article 83. If a province has only one Deputy to elect, at least five electors must concur in his election, distributing that number among the districts into which the province is divided, or forming new districts for that special purpose. Article 84. The four chapters of this constitution relating to elections shall be read. After this, the records of the proceedings of the district electoral meetings, forwarded by the respective presidents, shall be read; the electors shall present the certificates of election for examination by the secretary and inspectors who shall report on the following day whether they are in order. The certificates of the secretary and inspectors shall be examined by a commission of three members of the meeting, appointed for this purpose and the commission shall report on the following day. Article 85. When the district electors are assembled, the reports on the certificates shall be read, and if there is an objection to the certificates or to the electors because of lack of necessary qualifications, the meeting

126

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

shall decide the matter in the same sitting; the judgment shall be executed without recourse. Article 86. Thereupon the district electors, headed by their president, shall proceed to the cathedral or largest church where a solemn mass to the Holy Ghost shall be sung, and the bishop, or in default of him, the highest ecclesiastical dignitary, shall give a discourse appropriate to the circumstances. Article 87. After divine service they shall return to the place of meeting and in open session, the electors occupying seats without any preference, the president shall put the question contained in article 49 and every particular detail of its contents shall be observed. Article 88. The electors present shall proceed to the election of one or more Deputies who shall be chosen singly; the electors shall go to the table placed before the president, inspectors, and secretary and the latter shall inscribe on a list in the elector's presence, the nomination made by him. The secretary and inspectors shall vote first. Article 89. After the balloting the president, secretary, and inspectors shall count the votes, and he shall be elected who receives at least one more than one-half of the votes. If no one has a majority of votes, the two receiving the highest number of votes shall be voted upon, and the one receiving the larger number of votes in the second balloting shall be elected. In case of a tie, it shall be decided by drawing lots; the president shall publish the result of each election. Article 9o. After the election of Deputies, alternates shall be elected in the same manner and their number shall be one-third of the number of Deputies assigned to the province. If any province elects only one or two Deputies, nevertheless, one alternate shall be elected. These alternates shall enter the Cortes in case of the death of a Deputy to the Cortes or of his incapacity, as judged by the Cortes, at whatever time either event occurs after the election. Article 91. To become a Deputy to the Cortes, one must be a citizen in the full exercise of his rights, above twenty-five years of age, a native of the province or a resident of it for at least seven years, either a layman or one of the secular clergy; the election may fall on citizens either in or out of the meeting. Article 92. No one may be elected Deputy to the Cortes who does not have an adequate annual income derived from his own property. Article 93. The provision of the previous article shall remain suspended until the next Cortes shall have decided when it is to have full effect, and shall have determined the amount of income, and the kind of property from which it must be derived; their resolution shall be considered as constitutional law, as though inserted here. Article 94. If it should happen that the same person is elected by the province in which he was born and also by the province where he resides,

Spanish Constitution of 1812

127

his election by the latter shall prevail, and the alternate from the province in which he was born, shall take his place in the Cortes. Article 95. The ministers of state, the Councillors of State, and those holding office in the royal household may not be elected Deputies to the Cortes. Article 96. Foreigners, even though they have obtained certificates of citizenship from the Cortes, may not be elected Deputies to the Cortes. Article 97. No public official appointed by the government may be elected Deputy to the Cortes for the province in which he holds office. Article 98. The secretary shall make a record of the elections, which must be signed by himself, by the president, and by the electors. Article 99. Afterwards all the electors without any excuse shall grant to all and each of the Deputies full powers according to the following formula, each Deputy being given his respective powers for presentation in the Cortes. Article zoo. The powers shall be expressed in these terms: In the city , on 	 or town of 	 day of the month of 	 in the hall of 	 before me, the undersigned notary, and the witness called for this purpose, appeared (here shall be inserted the names of the president and the district electors composing the provincial electoral meeting) who, being convened in constitutional form, declared that the elections for parish and district electors having been duly made, according to the Constitution of the Spanish Monarchy, and with all the solemnities therein prescribed, as appears by the original certificates inscribed in the records, the said electors of the districts of the province of 	 on the day of 	 of the month of 	 of the present year, have nominated the Deputies who, in the name and representation of this province, are to assemble in the Cortes and who were elected Deputies to it for this province, to wit, N.N.N., as shown by the records drawn up and signed by N.N.; and that consequently they grant full powers to them as a group and severally to fulfill and discharge the august functions of their office, and in order that they, with the other Deputies, as representatives of the Spanish nation, may agree to and propose all that they may seem conducive to the national welfare, by virtue of powers vested in them by the constitution, and within the limits therein prescribed, without the power to derogate, alter, or vary in any manner the articles thereof for any reason; that they, the said constituents, by virtue of the powers granted them as electors appointed for the selection of Deputies, do bind themselves, as well in their own names as in the name of all inhabitants of the province, to support, obey, and comply with all that the said Deputies enact and resolve in accordance with the Political Constitution of the Spanish Monarchy. Done in the presence of N.N. witnesses, who, together with the said constituents, have signed these present, which I certify. Article 101. The president, inspectors and secretary shall send a copy

128

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

of the record of the elections, signed by themselves, to the Permanent Committee of the Cortes, and they shall cause the result of the elections to be printed, sending a copy thereof to each town of the province. Article 102. The salaries of the Deputies shall be paid by their respective provinces, to the amount stipulated by the general Cortes in the second year of each term, for the succeeding term; the overseas provinces shall allow their Deputies such sums as they deem necessary for the expenses of the outward and homeward journey. Article 103. In the provincial electoral meetings all the provisions of articles 55, 56, 57, and 58 shall be observed, with the exception mentioned in article 328.
CHAPTER VI. THE ASSEMBLING OF THE CORTES

Article 1o4. The Cortes shall assemble every year in the capital of the kingdom in a building assigned for that purpose. Article 105. When the Cortes considers it convenient to remove to another place, it may do so, provided that the town is not more than twelve leagues from the capital, and provided that two-thirds of the Deputies present shall agree to the removal. Article 106. The sessions of Cortes each year shall be held in three successive months, beginning on 1 March. Article 107. The Cortes may prolong its sessions for another month in only two cases: upon royal petition, and upon resolution of two-thirds of the Deputies, if the Cortes shall deem it necessary. Article 108. All the Deputies shall be renewed every two years. Article 109. If war or enemy occupation of some part of the territory of the monarchy should prevent the timely appearance of all or some of the Deputies from one or more provinces, the former Deputies of the respective provinces shall supply in their places; lots shall be drawn among them to complete the number required. Article 110. Deputies may not be re-elected unless a term has elapsed since their previous term of office. Article 111. The Deputies, upon arriving at the capital, shall present themselves before the permanent Committee of the Cortes for the registration of their names and the provinces electing them in the records of the secretariat of that Cortes. Article 112. In the year of the renewal of Deputies, the first preliminary meeting shall be held in open session on 12 February. Its president shall be the president of the Permanent Committee and the committee shall select from its own members the secretaries and inspectors. Article 113. At the first meeting, all the Deputies shall present their powers and they shall select, by a majority of votes, two commissions, one

Spanish Constitution

of

1812

129

of five members to examine the powers of all the Deputies, and the other of three members to examine the powers of the five commissioners. Article 114. On 20 February of the same year a second preliminary meeting shall be held in open sessions; at this meeting the two commissions shall report on the regularity of the powers, having, at hand, copies of the records of the provincial elections. Article 115. In this meeting, and in the others which are necessary until 25 February, doubts concerning the regularity of the powers and qualifications of the Deputies shall be decided definitely by majority vote. Article 116. In the year following that of the renewal of the Deputies, the first preliminary meeting shall be held on 20 February, and whatever other meetings are deemed necessary, shall be held until 25 February to decide, in the manner and form expressed in the three preceding articles, on the regularity of the powers presented by new Deputies. Article 117. On 25 February every year, the final preliminary meeting shall be held, in which the Deputies shall take the following oath, placing their hands on the Holy Gospels: "Do you swear to defend and preserve the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion without admitting any other in the kingdom?" R: "I do." "Do you swear to support, and cause to be observed the political constitution of the Spanish Monarchy sanctioned by the general and extraordinary Cortes of the nation in 1812?" R: "I do." "Do you swear to discharge faithfully the duties of the office entrusted to you by the nation and to have always in view, the welfare and prosperity of the same nation?" R: "I do." "If you observe your oath, may God reward you, if you do not, may He hold you to account."

Article 118. The Deputies shall then proceed by secret ballot to choose from their own number, a president, vice-president, and four secretaries; thereupon the Cortes shall be considered duly organized and constituted and the Permanent Committee shall cease in all its functions. Article 119. A committee of twenty-two members and of two secretaries shall be chosen on the same day to inform the King of the constitution of the Cortes and of their election of a president so that the King may

130

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

make known whether he will attend the opening of the Cortes which shall take place on i March. Article 120. If the King is out of the capital, he shall be informed in writing and he shall answer in the same manner. Article 121. The King shall personally attend the opening of the Cortes; if he should be unable to do so, the president shall open it on the appointed day which may not be postponed for any reason. The same formalities shall be observed at the closing of the Cortes. Article 122. The King shall enter the hall of the Cortes without a guard; he shall be accompanied only by the persons who shall be designated by the regulations of the internal government of the Cortes concerning the ceremony observed at the reception and departure of the King. Article 123. The King shall deliver a speech, proposing to the Cortes whatever seems suitable, to which the president shall respond in general terms. If the King does not attend personally, he shall send his speech to the president for the latter to read in the Cortes. Article 124. The Cortes may not deliberate in the presence of the King. Article 125. When the ministers of state shall make proposals to the Cortes in the name of the King, they shall attend the discussions at such times, and in such manner as the Cortes prescribes, and they may speak in the Cortes; but they may not be present when the votes are taken. Article 126. The sessions of the Cortes shall be public and only in cases demanding privacy shall secret sessions be held. Article 127. In the discussions of the Cortes and in all other matters pertaining to its government and internal order, the regulations which shall be made by this general and extraordinary Cortes shall be observed without prejudice to reforms which succeeding Cortes shall think proper to make. Article 128. Deputies shall be inviolable, and at no time and in no case may they be held responsible for their opinions by any authority. In criminal cases commenced against them, they shall be judged only by the court of the Cortes in the manner prescribed in the regulation for the internal government of the Cortes. During the sessions of the Cortes and the month following, Deputies may not be sued nor arrested for debts. Article 129. No deputy, during the term of his office, which shall be reckoned from the reception of the notification of his election by the Permanent Committee of the Cortes, shall receive for himself or shall seek for another, an office at the King's disposal or a promotion (unless it be governed by the strict rules of seniority) in his respective career. Article 13o. Likewise he may not, during his term in the Cortes or during the year succeeding the end of his term, obtain for himself, or solicit for another, any pension or honour at the disposal of the King.

Spanish Constitution of 1812
CHAPTER VII. THE POWERS OF THE CORTES

131

Article 131. The Cortes has the following powers:

I) To propose and decree laws and to interpret and alter them when necessary; 2) To receive the oath from the King, the Prince of Asturias, and the regency as provided in their places; 3) To settle any doubt of fact or right occuring in the order of succession to the crown; 4) To elect a regency or regent of the kingdom, as provided by the constitution and to designate the limits within which the regency or regent may exercise the royal authority; 5) To recognize publicly the Prince of Austurias; 6) To appoint a guardian for the minor King as provided by the constitution; 7) To approve before ratification, treaties of offensive alliance, of subsidies, and special treaties of commerce; 8) To grant or refuse the admission of foreign troops in the kingdom; 9) To decree the creation and suppression of offices in the courts established by the constitution and also the creation and suppression of public offices; 10) To fix annually upon royal proposal, the forces on land and sea, determining the establishment in time of peace, and the increase in time of war; II) To issue ordinances to the army, navy, and national militia in all their branches; 12) To fix the expenses of the public administration; 13) To establish annually the taxes and imposts; 14) To obtain loans, in cases of necessity, on national credit; 15) To approve the division of taxes among the provinces; 16) To examine and approve the accounts of the inversion of public funds; 17) To establish customs-houses and the duties paid therein; 18) To order what is expedient for the administration, preservation, and alienation of national property; 19) To determine the value, weight, standard, type, and denomination of money; 2o) To adopt the system of weights and measures that it considers most suitable and just; 21) To promote and encourage all kinds of industry and to remove obstacles impeding it; 22) To establish a general plan of public instruction in all the monarchy, and to approve what is planned for the education of the Prince of Asturias;

132

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

23) To approve the general regulation for the police and sanitation of the kindgom; 24) To protect the political liberty of the press; 25) To render effective the responsibility of the secretaries of state and other public employees; 26) To grant or refuse its consent in all those cases and acts which the constitution prescribes as necessary.
CHAPTER VIII. THE FORMATION OF LAWS AND THE ROYAL SANCTION

Article 132. Every Deputy possesses the power of proposing to the Cortes projects of law in writing, explaining the reasons on which they are founded. Article 133. Two days at least after the presentation and reading of a project of law, it shall be read a second time; the Cortes shall deliberate whether it should be admitted to discussion. Article 134. After admission to discussion, if the gravity of the matter, in the judgment of the Cortes, requires that it pass first to a committee, it shall be done thus. Article 135. Four days at least after the admission to discussion of the project, it shall be read a third time, and the day may be set for opening discussion on it. Article 136. On the day appointed for discussion the Cortes shall examine the project in its totality and every one of its articles. Article 137. The Cortes shall decide when the matter has been sufficiently discussed, and if so, it shall decide whether to proceed to a vote. Article 138. If it is decided to proceed to a vote, the voting shall commence immediately, the Cortes admitting or rejecting the project as a whole, or in part, or varying or modifying according to the observations made in discussion. Article 139. Decisions shall be given by an absolute majority of votes and the presence of one more than one-half of the total number of Deputies composing the Cortes shall be necessary for passing a law. Article 140. If the Cortes rejects a project of law in any stage of its examination, or resolves that it shall not be put to a vote, the project cannot be proposed again in the same year. Article 141. If it has been adopted, it shall be drawn up in duplicate form of a law and shall be read to the Cortes; after this, the two originals, signed by the president and two secretaries, shall be presented at once to the King by a committee. Article 142. The King sanctions the law. Article 143. The King sanctions in the following form, signed by his own hand, "Publish this as law."

1SpanishCo3tuf182

Article 144. The King refuses his sanction in the following form, also signed by his own hand, "Let it be returned to the Cortes," accompanying it with an exposition of the reasons for refusal. Article 145. The King shall have thirty days for the use of the prerogative; if within that time, he has not granted or refused this sanction, it shall be understood thereby that he has given his sanction and, he shall give it. Article 146. After the King gives or refuses his sanction, one of the two original copies, with its respective formula, shall be returned to the Cortes for its formation. This copy shall be preserved in the archives of the Cortes and the other copy shall be kept by the King. Article 147. If the King refuses his sanction, the bill may not be revived in the Cortes of that year; it may be revived in the Cortes of the next year. Article 148. If the same bill is proposed, admitted, and approved in the Cortes of the following year, it shall be presented to the King who may give his sanction or refuse it again in the form mentioned in articles 143 and 144; in the latter case, the bill shall not be revived in that year. Article 149. If, for the third time the bill is proposed, admitted, and approved by the Cortes of the following year, by this act, the bill is considered sanctioned, and when it is presented to the King, he shall give his sanction using the formula expressed in article 143. Article 150. If before the expiration of the term of thirty days, in which the King gives or refuses his sanction, the Cortes should close its sessions, the King shall give or refuse it in the first eight days of the sessions of the succeeding Cortes; should he not have done so in that amount of time, it shall thereby be considered as given and he shall give it, in fact, according to the prescribed form; but if the King refuses his sanction, the same Cortes may debate the same bill. Article 151. Although one or more years elapse since the King has refused his sanction to a bill without its being brought up again, yet if such a bill be brought up in the same legislature which adopted it, or in the two succeeding legislatures, it shall be considered always as the same bill with respect to the King's sanction as treated in the three preceding articles; but, if during the terms of the aforementioned legislatures, it is not brought up again in the same words, it shall be considered a new bill with respect to the King's sanction. Article 152. If, at the second or third time that the bill be brought up within the term prescribed by the preceding article, it should be rejected by the Cortes, it shall be considered a new bill whenever it is afterwards revived. Article 153. Laws are repealed with the same formalities and in the same manner that they are made.

134

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY
CHAPTER IX. PROMULGATION OF THE LAWS

Article 154. After a law has been published in the Cortes, the King shall be informed thereof, so that he may proceed immediately to its solemn promulgation. Article 155. The King shall promulgate the laws in the following terms:

"N. (the name of the King) by the grace of God and by the Constitution of the Spanish Monarchy, King of Spain, to all who shall see and hear these present, be it known that: The Cortes has decreed and We have sanctioned the following (here the literal text of the law). Therefore, We order all courts, magistrates, chief officials, governors and other civil, military, and ecclesiastical authorities of every class and dignity to observe, and cause to be observed, this present law and to see it executed and complied with, in all its parts. You shall take measures to carry it into effect and arrange for its printing, publication, and circulation. (It is directed to the respective minister of the state.)
Article 156. All laws shall be circulated by the royal command, through the respective ministers of state directly to every supreme court and every province and to the other superior authorities who shall transmit them to their subordinates.
CHAPTER X. THE PERMANENT COMMITTEE OF THE CORTES

Article 157. The Cortes, before closing its sessions, shall appoint a committee called the Permanent Committee of the Cortes, composed of seven of its own members, three from the peninsula, three from the overseas provinces; the seventh shall be chosen by lot between a European Deputy and an overseas Deputy. Article 158. At the same time the Cortes shall appoint two alternates to this committee, one from Europe and the other from overseas. Article 159. The Permanent Committee shall continue in its function from the end of one session to the beginning of the next session of the Cortes. Article 16o. The Committee shall have the following powers: I) To watch over the observance of the constitution and the laws in order to render an account to the Cortes of the infractions which they have noticed; 2) To convoke extraordinary Cortes in the cases prescribed by this constitution; 3) To discharge the functions prescribed in articles III and 112; 4) To give notice to alternate Deputies to fill the positions vacated by

Spanish Constitution of 1812

135

Deputies; and in case of the death or absolute incapacity of the Deputies and alternates of a province, to transmit the proper orders for a new election in the province.
CHAPTER XI. THE EXTRAORDINARY CORTES

Article 161. The extraordinary Cortes shall be composed of the same Deputies who constitute the ordinary Cortes during the two years of their t rm of office. Article 162. The Permanent Committee of the Cortes shall convoke the extraordinary Cortes on an appointed day in the three following cases: I) When the crown shall be vacant; 2) When the King is incapacitated in any way for governing, or when he wishes to abdicate the crown in favor of his successor; in the first case, the Committee is authorized to take all suitable measures to ascertain the incapacity of the King; 3) When, in critical circumstances and concerning arduous business, the King shall deem it necessary that it assemble and shall thus inform the Permanent Committee of the Cortes. Article 163. The extraordinary Cortes shall take cognizance of no other matters than those for which it was convoked. Article 164. The sessions of the extraordinary Cortes shall commence and close with the same formalities as those prescribed for the ordinary Cortes. Article 165. The assembly of extraordinary Cortes shall not prevent the election of new Deputies at the time prescribed. Article 166. If the extraordinary Cortes shall not have closed its sessions on the day appointed for the assembly of ordinary Cortes, the former shall cease its functions and the latter shall continue the matter for which the former was assembled. Article 167. The Permanent Committee of the Cortes shall continue in the functions designated in articles 11 i and 112, in the case mentioned in article 166.

TITLE IV. THE KING CHAPTER I. THE INVIOLABILITY OF THE KING AND HIS AUTHORITY

Article 168. The person of a King is sacred and inviolable and he is not subject to responsibility. Article 169. The King shall bear the title of Catholic Majesty. Article 17o. The power of executing the laws rests exclusively in the

136

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

King, and his authority extends to everything that conduces to the preservation of public order at home and to the security of the state abroad, in conformity with the constitution and the laws. Article 171. In addition to the royal prerogative of sanctioning and promulgating laws, the King has the following powers: I) To issue decrees, regulations and instructions that he considers conducive to the execution of the laws; 2) To see that speedy and full justice is administered in all the kingdom; 3) To declare war and make peace, giving a documented account thereof afterward to the Cortes; 4) To appoint the magistrates of all the civil and criminal courts at the proposal of the Council of State; 5) To appoint to all civil and military offices; 6) To present for all the bishoprics and for all the ecclesiastical dignities and benefices under royal patronage, at the proposal of the Council of State; 7) To grant honours and distinctions of every class according to law; 8) To command the armies and fleets and to appoint generals; 9) To direct the armed force, distributing it as may be most suitable; 10) To direct diplomatic and commercial relations; ii) To supervise the coining of money on which his head and name shall be placed; 12) To decree the inversion of funds appropriated for each branch of the public administration; 13) To pardon criminals according to law; 14) To propose to the Cortes, laws or reforms that he may consider conducive to the national welfare, for their deliberation according to prescribed form; is) To allow to circulate or to retain the conciliar decrees and pontifical bulls with consent of the Cortes, if they contain general provisions; if they deal with local or governmental affairs, the Council of State must be consulted; if they contain contentious points, they shall pass to the Supreme Court of Justice for their decision according to law; i6) To appoint and dismiss ministers of state freely. Article 172. The restrictions upon the authority of the King are as follows: I) The King shall not, under any pretext, prevent the celebration of the Cortes at the periods and in the cases prescribed in the constitution, nor suspend or dissolve it, nor embarrass, in any way whatever, its sessions and deliberations. Those who advise or assist in any attempt at such acts are declared traitors and shall be prosecuted as such; 2) The King may not absent himself from the kingdom without consent of the Cortes, or else he shall be understood to have abdicated the crown;

Spanish Constitution of 1812

137

3) The King may not alienate, grant, or renounce, or transfer in any way, the royal authority or any of his prerogatives; if, for any reason, he should wish to abdicate the throne in favour of his immediate successor, he must obtain the consent of the Cortes; 4) The King may not alienate, grant, or exchange any province, city, town, or village, however small, of Spanish territory; 5) The King may not enter into offensive alliance, nor make a special treaty of commerce with any foreign power without the consent of the Cortes; 6) Neither may he engage by treaty to grant subsidies to a foreign power without the consent of the Cortes; 7) The King may not grant or alienate the national property without consent of the Cortes; 8) He may not, upon his own authority, impose taxes, either direct or indirect, nor demand supplies under any name or for any purpose; all imposts must be authorized by the Cortes; 9) The King may not grant any exclusive right to any person or corporation; 1o) The King may not take the property of any individual or corporation, nor disturb them in the possession, free use, and benefit thereof; and in any case, if it should be necessary, for an object of recognized public utility, to take the property of an individual, that person shall be indemnified, and given a fair sum according to the judgment of upright men; I) The King may not, upon his own authority, deprive anyone of his liberty or impose any penalty upon him. The minister of state who signs such an order, and the judge executing it, shall be responsible to the nation and shall be prosecuted as violators of personal liberty; 12) The King, before contracting marriage, shall inform the Cortes thereof in order to obtain its consent; if he fails in this respect, he shall be understood to have abdicated the crown. Article 173. The King upon his accession to the throne, or if he has been under age, upon his assumption of the government of the kingdom, shall take the following oath before the Cortes: N (here his name) by the grace of God, and the Constitution of the Spanish Monarchy, King of Spain: I swear by God and the Holy Gospels that I shall protect and preserve the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion without permitting any other in the kingdom; that I shall defend and cause to be supported, the political constitution and the laws of the Spanish monarchy and that all my actions shall be directed to its good and welfare; that I shall not alienate, grant, or dismember any part of the kingdom; that I shall not exact any produce, money, or anything else which has not been decreed by the Cortes; that I shall never deprive anyone of his

138

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY property and that I shall respect, above all, the political liberty of the nation and the personal liberty of the individual; if I shall act in opposition to what I have sworn, or any part thereof, I ought not to be obeyed, and such acts shall be null and void. May God help me and defend me if I keep my oath; otherwise, may He call me to account. CHAPTER II. THE SUCCESSION TO THE CROWN

Article 174. The kingdom of Spain is indivisible, and from the promulgation of the constitution, the succession shall always be among the lawful descendants, male and female, in regular order of primogeniture and representation of lines mentioned hereafter. Article 175. No one shall be King of Spain who was not born in lawful wedlock. Article 176. In the same degree of kinship, males shall be preferred to females, and the elder to the younger always; but females, of a nearer line or nearer degree within the same line shall be preferred to males of more remote line or degree. Article 177. The son or daughter of the eldest son of the King, in case of the death of the eldest son before succeeding to the crown, shall be preferred to the uncles and shall succeed to his grandfather immediately by right of representation. Article 178. So long as the direct line of succession shall exist, the collateral branches shall not succeed. Article 179. The King of Spain is our lord, Don Ferdinand VII of Bourbon, who now reigns. Article 180. After our lord, Don Ferdinand VII of Bourbon, his legitimate descendants, both male and female, shall succeed him; in their default, there shall succeed his brothers and sisters and his father's brothers and sisters, both male and female, and their legitimate descendants in the order provided, preserving always the right of representation and the preference of the nearer line to the more remote ones. Article 181. The Cortes shall exclude from the succession that or those persons who are incapable of governing or who have committed an act for which they deserve to lose the right to the crown. Article 182. If all the lines herein designated become extinct, the Cortes shall make new choices as may be most suitable to the nation, following always the order and rules of succession herein established. Article 183. When the crown shall devolve, or has devolved upon a female, she may not select a husband without consent of the Cortes; otherwise she shall be considered to have abdicated the crown. Article 184. When a female reigns, the prince consort shall have no authority in the kingdom and shall take no part in the government.

Spanish Constitution of 1812
CHAPTER III. THE MINORITY OF THE KING AND THE REGENCY

139

Article 185. The King is a minor until he attains eighteen years of age. Article 186. During the minority of the King, the kingdom shall be

governed by a regency. Article 187. It shall be so ruled when the King is incapacitated for the exercise of his authority for any physical or moral cause. Article 188. If the King has been incapacitated for more than two years, and the immediate successor is of age, the Cortes may appoint him regent in place of a regency. Article 189. In those cases in which the crown shall be vacated during the minority of the Prince of Asturias, until such time as the extraordinary Cortes assembles, if the ordinary Cortes is not in session, there shall be a provisional regency composed as follows: the queen mother, if she be alive; two Deputies of the Permanent Committee of the Cortes, the oldest in order of their election; the two oldest Councillors of State, the dean and the next senior member; if the queen mother be dead, then the third senior Councillor of State shall be one of the regency. Article 19o. The provisional regency shall be presided over by the queen mother, if she be living; in default of her, by the eldest member of the Permanent Committee in order of election to it. Article 191. The provisional regency shall dispatch no business save that which admits no delay, and shall not remove or appoint civil employees except temporarily. Article 192. When the extraordinary Cortes is assembled it shall choose a regency of three or five persons. Article 193. To become a member of the regency, one must be a citizen in the exercise of his rights; foreigners although they may have certificate of citizenship, are excluded. Article 194. The regency shall be presided over by one of its members upon the nomination of the Cortes which shall decide, if necessary, whether the presidency shall be held by turns and with what limitations. Article .195. The regency shall discharge the authority of the King within the limitations to be prescribed by the Cortes. Article 196. Both the provisional and permanent regencies shall take the oath prescribed in article 173, adding the clause that they shall be faithful to the King; the permanent regency shall add further: that it observe the conditions imposed by the Cortes for the exercise of its authority, and that when the King shall be of age or his incapacity ceases, they shall turn over the government of the kingdom to him, under the penalty of being punished as traitors if they delay a moment in doing so. Article 197. All acts of the regency shall be published in the name of the King. Article 198. The guardian of the minor King shall be the person ap-

140

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

pointed by the late King in his will. In default of such appointment the queen mother shall be the guardian but only until remarriage. In default of her, the Cortes shall name the guardian. In the first and third cases, the guardian must be a native of the kingdom. Article 199. The regency shall see that the education of the minor King shall be suited to his high dignity, and that it be carried out according to the plan approved by the Cortes. Article 200. The Cortes shall assign the salary that the members of the regency shall receive.
CHAPTER IV. THE ROYAL FAMILY AND THE RECOGNITION OF THE PRINCE OF ASTURIAS

Article

201.

The King's eldest son shall bear the title of Prince of

Asturias.
Article 202. The other sons and daughters of the King shall bear the title of Infantes of Spain. Article 203. The sons and daughters of the Prince of Asturias shall likewise bear the title of Infantes of Spain. Article 204. No other persons but the above mentioned may bear the title of Infante of Spain. Article 205. Infantes of Spain shall enjoy the distinctions and honours which they have hitherto enjoyed; they may be appointed to any offices except those of judicature and that of Deputy to the Cortes. Article 206. The Prince of Asturias may not leave the kingdom without the consent of the Cortes; otherwise, he is thereby excluded from the succession to the crown. Article 207. He shall likewise lose his right to the crown by remaining abroad longer than permitted, and by refusing to comply with the summons within the time set by the Cortes when it requires his re-entry. Article 208. The Prince of Asturias, the Infantes, and their children and descendants who are subjects of the King, may not contract marriage without the consent of the King and of the Cortes under the pain of being excluded from the succession to the crown. Article 209. An authentic copy of the certificate of birth, marriage, and death of all persons of the royal family shall be delivered to the Cortes, or if it is not assembled, to the Permanent Committee, for preservation in its archives. Article 210. The Prince of Asturias shall be recognized by the Cortes with the formalities provided by the regulation for its internal government. Article 211. This recognition shall be made in the first Cortes assembled after his birth. Article 212. The Prince of Asturias, upon attaining the age of fourteen years, shall take an oath before the Cortes as follows:

Spanish Constitution of 1812 N

141

(here his name) Prince of Asturias: I swear by God and the Holy Gospels that I will defend and preserve the Apostolic Roman Catholic religion without permitting any other in the kingdom; that I will support the political constitution of the Spanish monarchy, and that I will be faithful and obedient to the King. So help me God.
CHAPTER V. THE REVENUE OF THE ROYAL FAMILY

Article 213. The Cortes shall assign to the King the annual revenue of his household, which will be commensurate with his high dignity. Article 214. All those palaces possessed by his predecessors shall belong to the King, and the Cortes shall assign such lands as they consider most convenient for his recreation. Article 215. The Cortes shall assign to the Prince of Asturias from the day of his birth, and to the Infantes from their seventh year of age, the annual sum for their establishments, which sum must be commensurate with their respective dignities. Article 216. The Cortes shall assign the sum which it determines as dowry for the Infantes, when they marry; when this has been given, the annual sums shall cease. Article 217. If the Infantes marry and live in the kingdom they shall continue to receive the annual sums assigned them; if they marry and live abroad, their allowance shall cease and the gross sum, as determined by the Cortes, shall be given them. Article 218. The Cortes shall assign the annual sum for the establishment of the dowager-queen. Article 219. The salaries of the members of the regency shall be taken from the revenue allotted to the royal household. Article 220. At the beginning of each reign, the Cortes shall assign the revenue of the royal household and of the establishments of his family, as mentioned in the preceding articles; no alteration may be made during the reign. Article 221. All the sums shall be paid out of the national treasury to the administrator appointed by the King, and all the accounts shall be settled by the said administrator.
CHAPTER VI. THE MINISTERS OF STATE

Article

222. There shall be seven ministers of state, viz: I) Foreign Relations; 2) Internal Affairs of the Peninsula and Adjacent Islands; 3) Overseas Provinces; 4) Grace and Justice;

142

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

5) Finance; 6) War; 7) Navy. Successive Cortes may make in this system of ministries of state such variation as circumstances and experience demand. Article 223. To become a minister of state, one must be a citizen in the exercise of his rights; foreigners, though they may have certificates of citizenship, are excluded. Article 224. A special regulation approved by the Cortes shall determine the kind of affairs which belong to each department. Article 225. All the King's orders must be signed by the minister of state of the corresponding department. No court, or public official shall execute an order which lacks this requisite. Article 226. The ministers of state shall be responsible to the Cortes for the orders that they authorize contrary to the constitution and the laws, and their having been ordered to do so by the King shall not serve as an excuse. Article 227. The ministers of state shall every year produce an estimate of the expense of their respective departments of the public administrations, and shall render accounts of their expenditures, according to the manner prescribed. Article 228. In order to enforce the responsibility of the ministers, the Cortes shall first decree that there is cause for accusation. Article 229. After this decree has been given, the minister of state shall be suspended, and the Cortes shall send to the Supreme Court of Justice all the documents concerning the case. That court shall have cognizance of the case and shall decide it according to the laws. Article 23o. The Cortes shall assign the salaries that the ministers of state shall receive during their actual service.
CHAPTER VII. THE COUNCIL OF STATE

Article 231. The Council of State shall be composed of forty persons who are citizens in the full exercise of their rights; foreigners, although they possess a certificate of citizenship, are excluded. Article 232. The Councillors shall be precisely of the following description, to wit: only four ecclesiastics of acknowledged and distinguished talent and merit, of which number two shall be bishops; only four grandees of Spain of reputed virtue, talent, and necessary knowledge; and the remainder shall be chosen from those subjects who have distinguished themselves most by their brilliance and attainments, or by their signal service in one of the principal branches of the administration and government of the state. The Cortes may not propose for these offices, any person who

panish Constitution of 1812

143

is a Deputy to the Cortes at the time of the selection. At least twelve of the members of the Council of State shall be natives of the overseas provinces.

Article 233. All the Councilors of State shall be appointed by the king upon the proposal of the Cortes. Article 234. For the formation of this council, the Cortes shall prepare a triple list for the three classes aforementioned, in the proper proportion, awl from this list the King shall select the forty members for the Council of State, selecting the ecclesiastics from the list of their class, the grandees from their list, and the others from their list. Article 235. When a vacancy occurs in the Council of State, the first Cortes which assembles thereafter shall present to the King three persons of the class in which the vacancy occurs; the King shall select one of the three. Article 236. The Council of State is the only council of the King; he shall consult it in grave affairs of state especially in granting or refusing his sanction to laws, and in declaring war and making peace treaties. Article 237. The Council shall have the privilege of presenting to the King three candidates for each ecclesiastical benefice and judicial office. Article 238. The King shall frame regulations for the government of the Council of State after consulting with it, and the regulations shall be presented to the Cortes for its approval. Article 239. Councillors of State may not be removed from office without lawful cause substantiated before the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 24o. Salaries for the Councillors of State shall be fixed by the Cortes. Article 241. Upon taking office the Councilors of State shall take oath before the King to support the constitution, to be faithful to the King, and to advise him, looking to the best interests of the nation, without regard to personal interests or private views.

TITLE V. THE COURTS AND THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE IN CIVIL AND CRIMINAL CASES
CHAPTER I. THE COURTS

Article 242. The power of applying laws in civil and criminal cases belongs exclusively to the courts. Article 243. Neither the Cortes or the King may perform judicial functions in any case, nor prevent the trial of pending cases, nor order the reopening of adjudged cases.

144

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

Article 244. The laws shall determine the order and formalities of procedure which shall be uniform in all courts, and neither the Cortes or the King may cause them to be dispensed with. Article 245. The courts may not exercise any other functions than those of judging and of enforcing their judgments. Article 246. The courts may not suspend the execution of laws nor make any rules for the administration of justice. Article 247. No Spaniard may be tried in civil and criminal cases by any commission, but only by a competent court, previously authorized by law. Article 248. There shall be only one jurisdiction for all classes of persons in public civil and criminal cases. Article 249. The ecclesiastics shall continue under ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the limits that the ordinance prescribes or shall prescribe. Article 25o. The military shall likewise remain under their own jurisdiction within the limits that the ordinance prescribes or shall prescribe. Article 251. In order to be appointed judge or magistrate, one must be a native Spaniard and have attained twenty-five years of age. The other necessary qualifications shall be determined by law. Article 252. Magistrates and judges may not be deposed from their offices, whether selected for a limited or permanent term, except for cause legally proven and adjudged, nor may they be suspended except for an accusation legally charged. Article 253. If any complaints against a magistrate shall be brought to the King, and if after investigation, they seem to him to be well founded, he may, upon consultation with the Council of State, suspend him, referring the case to the Supreme Court of Justice for its decision according to the law. Article 254. Judges shall be responsible personally for their failure to observe the laws governing procedure in criminal and civil cases, Article 255. Popular action shall lie against magistrates and judges who commit bribery, corruption, and prevarication. Article 256. The Cortes shall assign an adequate compensation for magistrates and judges. Article 257. Justice shall be administered in the name of the King, and executory sentences and provisions of the superior courts shall be issued in his name. Article 258. The civil and criminal code and the code of commerce shall be the same throughout the monarchy without prejudice to the variations that the Cortes may make in certain circumstances. Article 259. In the capital of the kingdom there shall be a court called the Supreme Court of Justice. Article 26o. The Cortes shall determine the number of magistrates

1Spanish4Cot5uf182

who are to compose the court and the chambers in which they may be placed. Article 261. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have power: 1) To arrange the jurisdiction of the courts of audience (audiencia)
among of isl

themselves in all Spanish territory and the jurisdictions of the courts audience with those of the special courts in the peninsula and adjacent ands. In the overseas provinces they shall be adjusted as the law shall

direct;

2) To judge ministers of state after the Cortes has declared that there cause of accusation against them; 3) To take cognizance of all cases of removal and suspensions of councillors and magistrates of courts of audience; 4) To take cognizance of criminal cases brought against ministers of state, Councillors of State, and magistrates of the courts of audience; the preparatory proceedings shall be held before the highest civil officer who shall report them to the court; 5) To take cognizance of all criminal cases brought against members the Supreme Court. Should it be necessary to enforce the responsibility of this Supreme Court, the Cortes after the formality established in article 228, shall proceed to appoint for this purpose a court composed of nine judges, selected by lot from eighteen nominees; 6) To take cognizance of the investigation of administration of every public employee subject to the court, according to law; 7) To take cognizance of all litigious matters pertaining to the royal patronage; 8) To take cognizance of the recourses to force by any of the higher ecclesiastical courts; 9) To take cognizance of appeals from errors interposed against sentences, given in the court of last instance, for the purpose of retrial of the original case, and to enforce the responsibility mentioned in article 254. In the overseas provinces, the courts of audience shall have cognizance of these appeals in the manner described below; to) To receive expressions of doubt from other courts concerning the proper interpretation of a law and to consult with the King about such expressions, laying before him the available documents thereof, so that he may suggest a proper decision in the Cortes; ) To examine the lists of civil and criminal cases which the courts of audience must remit to it, in order to promote the prompt administration of justice, to send copies to the government for the same purpose, and to cause them to be printed. Article 262. All civil and criminal cases shall be terminated within the jurisdiction of each court of audience. Article 263. The courts of audience shall take cognizance of all civil
is of

146

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

and criminal cases, in the second or third instance, of the lower courts of their jurisdiction, as the laws determine, and also of the cases of suspension and removal of the inferior judges of their jurisdictions in the manner prescribed by law, giving account thereof to the King. Article 264. Magistrates who have heard a case in second instance may not sit as judges on the review of the case in third instance. Article 265. The courts of audience shall also have cognizance of the jurisdictions of the inferior judges of their territory. Article 266. They likewise shall have cognizance of recourse to force which are introduced by the ecclesiastical courts and authorities of the territory. Article 267. They shall also receive from all inferior judges of their territory, punctual notice of cases of criminal prosecution and lists of civil and criminal cases pending in their jurisdictions, with a report on the progress of both kinds of cases, in order to promote the promptest administration of justice. Article 268. The courts of audience overseas shall also have cognizance of the appeals for errors in law; such appeals must be presented to those courts of audience that have enough judges for the formation of three courts and have not in any instance had cognizance of the case. In the courts of audience that do not have this number of judges, the appeals shall be interposed from one court to another of those comprehended in the same district of the same superior government; if there is only one court of audience, appeals shall go to the nearest court of audience in the nearest district. Article 269. After the court of audience, having cognizance thereof, has declared that there is error in the proceedings appealed from, account thereof shall be given to the Supreme Court of Justice, along with the proper documents, in order to enforce the responsibility mentioned in article 254. Article 270. The courts of audience shall send each year to the Supreme Court of Justice, correct lists of the civil cases, and, every six months, the criminal cases, either decided or pending, with an indication of the stage of progress in each case, including also, those reports received from inferior judges. Article 271. Special laws and regulations shall determine the number of judges of the courts of audience, such number not to be less than seven, the form of these courts, and their places of establishment. Article 272. When the proper division of Spanish territory mentioned in article i i has been made, the number of courts of audience shall be regulated accordingly and the territory for each shall be designated. Article 273. Districts proportionately equal shall be established, and in the chief town of each district there shall be a judge with a corresponding jurisdiction.

	1Spanish8C4otu7f2 Article 274. The powers of these judges shall be limited to litigated cases, and the law shall determine which cases shall come under their jurisdiction in the chief city and in the towns of the district, as well as the amount to which they can give judgment in civil cases, without appeal. Article 275. Magistrates shall be established in every town and the law shall determine the limits of their powers in both litigious and economic matters. Article 276. All judges of inferior courts must give account within three days to their respective courts of audience of their criminal cases and afterwards shall report on the progress thereof at the times prescribed by the court of audience. Article 277. They must likewise send to their respective courts of audience general lists of the civil cases every six months; every three months they must send a list of the criminal cases pending, with information on the progress of such cases. Article 278. The laws shall decide whether special courts shall be established to take cognizance of special legal business. Article 279. Magistrates and judges, upon assuming office, shall swear to support the constitution, to be faithful to the King, to observe the laws, and to administer justice impartially.
CHAPTER II. THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE IN CIVIL CASES

Article 280. No Spaniard may be deprived of the right of having his differences terminated by arbiters chosen by both parties. Article 281. The judgment given by the arbiters shall be executed unless the parties have reserved the right of appealing it. Article 282. The magistrate of each town shall exercise therein the office of conciliator; whoever has a case of civil suit or of injuries received, must appear before him for that purpose. Article 283. The magistrate with two honest men, one appointed by each party, shall hear the argument of the plaintiff and of the defendant; after consulting his associates, the magistrate shall reach the decision best calculated to terminate the suit without further litigation; the suit shall be terminated if the parties agree to this extrajudicial decision. Article 284. No law suit shall be commenced unless it appears that conciliatory measures have been tried previously. Article 285. Lawsuits, regardless of their character, shall have, at most, three trials and three definitive judgments pronounced upon them. When two like sentences have been given and the suit is brought to a third trial, the number of judges on the third trial must exceed the number of judges on the second trial according to the provisions of law; the law shall also determine on general principles concerning the nature of the several courts

148

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

and the cases to be brought before them, how and in what cases their sentences are to be put in execution.
CHAPTER III. THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE IN CRIMINAL CASES

Article 286. The laws shall direct the administration of justice in criminal cases so that the trials may be brief and regular and that the offenders may be brought promptly to punishment. Article 287. No Spaniard may be arrested without the preceding formalities of a summary inquest of the deed for which he lawfully deserves corporal punishment, and of the written order of judge, which shall be communicated to the person upon his arrest. Article 288. Every person must obey these mandates; any resistance shall be considered a grave crime. Article 289. If resistance is offered or flight is attempted by the offender, force may be used to secure him; Article 29o. The person arrested, before commitment to jail, shall be brought before a judge, whenever that is possible, for examination; otherwise he shall be jailed as an offender and shall be examined by the judge within twenty-four hours thereafter. Article 291. The prisoner shall not be examined upon oath; in criminal cases, no oath shall be taken by any one in his own cause. Article 292. Anyone may arrest an offender seized in flagrance delicto and bring him before a judge; when the offender has been brought before a judge, or jailed, the case shall be proceeded with as prescribed in the two preceding articles. Article 293. If there is reason for commitment to jail, the judge shall issue a warrant to that effect, and a copy of it shall be delivered to the jail keeper for registration in his records; without such writ, no jail keeper may receive a person as a prisoner, under the strictest responsibility. Article 294. The property of an offender shall be attached only in cases of pecuniary responsibility, and in proportion to the extent of such responsibility. Article 295. No person shall be jailed who shall give sufficient bail unless it is as expressly provided by law. Article 296. When, in any stage of the case, it appears that corporal punishment will not be suffered by the offender, he shall be put at liberty upon giving bail. Article 297. The jails shall be regulated so as to secure the prisoners but not molest them; the jail keepers shall keep them in good order and shall separate those to whom the judges have forbidden communication, but never in subterranean dungeons or unhealthful cells. Article 298. The frequency of prison inspection shall be determined

Spanish Constitution of 1812	

149

by law and no prisoner shall fail to present himself under any pretext. Article 299. The judge and the jail keeper who fail to conform to the

provisions of the preceding articles shall be punished as guilty of arbitrary detention, which shall be considered a crime in the criminal code. Article 300. Within twenty-four hours, the accused shall be informed of the cause of the detention and the name of his accuser, if there be any. Article 301. Upon examination of the accused, all the documents and the depositions of the witnesses, together with their names, shall be read to him; and if he does not know the witnesses, he shall be given as much information as he asks in order to learn their identity. Article 302. The remainder of the prosecution shall be public in the manner prescribed by law. Article 303. The penalty of confiscation of property may not be imposed. Article 304. Torture and other means of compulsion shall never be used. Article 305. No punishment for any crime shall extend to the family of the offender for any period of time; the culprit alone shall bear the entire punishment. Article 306. The house of a Spaniard shall not be forcibly entered except in the cases determined by law for the good order and security of the state. Article 307. If, at a later time, the Cortes should consider it desirable to make a distinction between judges of fact and judges of law, it shall establish such distinctions as is deemed suitable. Article 308. If, in extraordinary circumstances, the security of the state should demand the suspension of some of the formalities of the arrest of offenders, as described in this chapter, throughout the monarchy, or in any part thereof, the Cortes may decree it for a limited time.

TITLE VI. THE INTERNAL GOVERNMENT OF THE PROVINCES AND OF THE TOWNS
CHAPTER I. THE MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

Article 309. For the internal government of the towns there shall be municipal councils (ayuntamientos) composed of the chief magistrates (alcaldes), the aldermen (regidores), and the town proctor (procurador sindico); they shall be presided over by the principal civil officer, in default of him, by the magistrate or if there be two magistrates, by the first elected. Article 310. Municipal councils shall be established in the towns lacking them; wherever it is suitable, one shall be set up. Towns that, with or

150

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

without their surrounding district, have a population of ,000 souls must have municipal councils; proper limits shall be determined for each district. Article 311. The number of members of each class who are to compose the municipal councils shall be determined by law, according to the population. Article 312. The chief magistrates, aldermen, and town proctors shall be chosen by election in the towns; those aldermen and others who hold perpetual office in the municipal council, whatever their title or position, lose their offices. Article 313. The citizens of each town shall assemble every year in December to elect by a majority of votes and according to the population, the specified number of electors, who must reside in that town, and be in the full exercise of their rights of citizenship. Article 314. In the same month, the electors shall choose by absolute majority of votes, the magistrate or magistrates, the aldermen, and the town proctor or proctors in order that they may take office on i January of the following year. Article 315. The magistrates shall be changed each year as well as one-half of the aldermen and of the town proctors whenever there are two of the latter; if there is only one proctor, he shall be changed annually. Article 316. The above named officers may not be re-elected until at least two years have elapsed, wherever the population permits. Article 317. To become a magistrate, alderman, or town proctor, one must not only be a citizen in full exercise of his rights, but also be above twenty-five years of age and have resided in the town for at least five years. Other qualifications for these officers shall be determined by law. Article 318. No incumbent of public office appointed by the King may be a magistrate, alderman, or town proctor; those serving in the National Militia are not comprehended in this ruling. Article 319. No citizen may excuse himself, without legal cause, from the assumption of the above-mentioned offices. Article 320. Each municipal council shall elect, by absolute majority of votes, a secretary, who shall be paid out of public funds. Article 321. The municipal councils shall have the following duties: I) To preserve the cleanliness and health of the town; 2) To assist the magistrate in everything pertaining to the security of the inhabitants and their property and to the preservation of public order; 3) To collect and administer the revenue and excise duties according to law and to regulations, appointing a treasurer under the responsibility of those who appoint him; 4) To assess and collect the taxes and to remit them to the proper treasury; 5) To supervise all primary schools and other educational institutions supported by community funds;

Spanish Constitution of 1812

151

6) To oversee hospitals, foundling's homes, hospices, and other charitable institutions according to the rules prescribed; 7) To direct the construction and repair of roads, causeways, bridges, and prisons; to take care of woods and forests belonging to the town, and of all public works of necessity, utility, and ornament. 8) To frame municipal ordinances for the town and to present them to the Cortes for approval, through the provincial council which shall forward them accompanied by its own opinion thereon. 9) To promote agriculture, industry, and commerce according to the locality and circumstances of the town and whatever else which might be advantageous to it. Article 322. If some works or other objects of public utility should be wanted, and if, through lack of funds, it should be necessary to resort to taxation, these taxes may not be levied without consent of the Cortes, obtained through the provincial council. In case of urgency of such works, the municipal council with the approval of the provincial council may levy such taxes pro tempore until the decision of the Cortes shall be made. These shall be administered like the regular revenue. Article 323. The municipal councils shall discharge their duties under the inspection of the provincial council to which an authenticated account of receipts and expenditures shall be transmitted annually.
CHAPTER II. THE CIVIL GOVERNMENT OF THE PROVINCES AND THE PROVINCIAL COUNCILS

Article 324. The civil government of the provinces shall be vested in a governor whom the King appoints in each province. Article 325. To promote its prosperity, each province shall have a provincial council presided over by the governor. Article 326. This provincial council shall be composed of its president, of the intendant and seven individuals elected as shall be later described, without prejudice to the variations in number which the Cortes may think suitable, or circumstances may require, after the new partition of provinces mention in Article Article 327. One-half of the members of the provincial council shall be renewed every two years; after the first two years, the larger number shall leave their seats, and the lesser number shall leave at the end of the second term of the two years, and so on progressively. Article 328. The elective members of the provincial council shall be chosen by the district electors on the day following their election of Deputies to the Cortes and in the same manner. Article 329. Three alternates for each council shall be similarly elected at the same time. Article 33o. To become a member of the provincial council, one must

152

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

be a citizen in the exercise of his rights, above twenty-five years of age, a native or inhabitant of the province with at least seven years of residence therein, and must have sufficient means to maintain himself decently; no royal appointee, as mentioned above, in article 318, may be a member of the council. Article 331. No one may be re-elected until four years have elapsed from the time at which he ceased his functions in the provincial council. Article 332. When the governor cannot preside over the council, the intendant shall do so, and in default of the latter, the first elected member of the council. Article 333. The council shall appoint a secretary to be paid by provincial funds. Article 334. The councils shall hold their sessions ninety days, at most, each year, according to their convenience. In the peninsula they must assemble on 1 March; overseas, on 1 June. Article 335. The provincial councils shall have power: I) To examine and approve of the assessment of taxes for the various towns from the provincial quota; 2) To watch over the proper inversion of the public funds of the towns and to examine their accounts so that, being authenticated by the provincial councils, they may gain the superior approval, conforming themselves in every detail to the laws and regulations; 3) To see that municipal councils are established where they should be according to Article 31o; 4) To propose to the government the levy of suitable excise duties to be used for the construction of new works of public utility in the province, or for the repair of old ones, in order to obtain the approval of the Cortes for it; In the overseas provinces, if the urgency of the public works does not permit waiting for the resolution of the Cortes, the council, with the express assent of the governor, may levy excise duties temporarily, giving immediate account thereof to the government for the approval of the Cortes. The council, upon its own responsibility, shall appoint a treasurer for the collection of the excise duties; and the accounts of expenditure, after examination by the council, shall be transmitted to the government for its recognition and examination, and finally shall pass to the Cortes for its approval. 5) To promote the education of youth according to the plans approved, to encourage agriculture, industry, and commerce, and to protect those who have made new discoveries in these branches; 6) To inform the government of abuses which they have noted in the administration of public funds; 7) To take the census and prepare statistical reports of the provinces; 8) To see that charitable institutions fulfill their respective purposes,

Spanish Constitution of 1812

153

and to propose to the government the regulations that they consider suitable for the reform of abuses noted; 9) To inform the Cortes of the infringements upon the constitution that they observe in the province; o) The overseas provincial councils shall oversee the economy, order, and progress of the missions for the conversion of heathen Indians; the superintendents of the missions shall give accounts of their operations so that abuses may be prevented; these accounts shall be transmitted to the
government. Article 336. If any council exceeds its powers, the king may suspend

the elective members thereof, informing the Cortes of this disposition and the reasons for it, so that the Cortes may make the proper decision upon the matter; during the suspension, the alternates shall take up the functions of the council. Article 337. All members of the municipal and provincial councils upon assuming office shall take an oath, the former upon the hands of the chief civil officer of the jurisdiction, or in default of him, of the magistrate first elected, the latter upon the hands of the governor of the provinces, to support the political constitution of the Spanish Monarchy, to observe the laws, to be faithful to the King and to discharge religiously the duties of office. TITLE VII. TAXATION
CHAPTER I

Article 338. The Cortes shall establish or confirm annually the taxes, either direct or indirect, general, provincial, or municipal; those already established shall continue until their rejection or the imposition of new taxes shall be announced. Article 339. Taxes shall be apportioned among all Spaniards according to their ability, without any exception or privilege. Article 34o. The taxes shall be proportioned to the appropriations decreed by the Cortes for public service in all branches. Article 341. In order to enable the Cortes to fix the sums necessary in all branches of the public service, and the taxes needed to raise such sums, the minister of finance shall present to the Cortes upon its assembly the general estimate of sums deemed necessary, after he has received the estimates from the other departments. Article 342. The finance minister shall likewise present, along with the estimates of expenses, the plan of taxation necessary to raise such
SUMS.

154

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

Article 343. If the King should consider any tax burdensome or prejudicial, he shall so notify the Cortes through the minister of finance, presenting at the same time, such substitute for it as he considers most suitable. Article 344. After the quota of direct taxes has been fixed, the Cortes shall assign the proper share to each province according to its wealth; the minister of finance shall also furnish the necessary estimates for this assignment. Article 345. There shall be a national treasury charged with the disposal of the funds apportioned to the service of each State. Article 346. Each province shall have a treasury for the safekeeping of funds collected for the public treasury. The provincial treasuries shall be in correspondence with the national treasury, at whose disposition the funds shall be kept. Article 347. No payment shall be admitted to the account of the national treasury except by virtue of a royal decree signed by the finance minister, in which decree shall be stated for what service the payment is required, together with the decree of the Cortes authorizing it. Article 348. To insure correctness in the account of the national treasury, the income and expenditures must be examined, respectively, by the Auditing Committee on Assessments and by that on Distribution of Public Taxes. Article 349. A special regulation shall direct those committees so that they may serve the purpose of their institution. Article 35o. A general auditing committee, to be established by a special law, shall examine all the accounts of public funds. Article 351. As soon as the account of the national treasury, comprising the annual revenue from taxes and duties and their inversion, shall be approved definitely by the Cortes, such account shall be printed, published, and circulated among the provincial and municipal councils. Article 352. The accounts of the expenditures in each department, rendered by the respective ministers, shall likewise be printed, published, and circulated. Article 353. The management of the public funds shall always be independent of any authority other than that to which it is confided. Article 354. No customs houses shall be established except in sea ports and at the frontiers; this disposition shall not be in effect until the Cortes so decrees it. Article 355. The public debt shall be one of the first considerations of the Cortes, and the Cortes shall devise the best means for its gradual extinction and the payment of interest which is due; it shall arrange everything concerning the direction of this important branch, as much the agencies to be established, which must be managed separately from the general treasury, as the supervision of accounts and auditing.

Spanish Constitution of 1812 155

TITLE VIII. THE NATIONAL MILITARY FORCE CHAPTER I. TROOPS IN CONTINUAL SERVICE

Article 356. There shall be a permanent national force on land and sea for the defense of the state abroad and the preservation of order at home. Article 357. The Cortes shall fix annually the number of troops necessary, according to circumstances, and shall determine the most convenient method of raising them. Article 358. The Cortes shall also fix annually the number of ships of military marine which are to be armed or to be kept armed. Article 359. The Cortes, by means of respective ordinances, shall establish everything relative to discipline, order of promotion, salaries, administration, and whatever else conduces to the good condition of the army and navy. Article 36o. Military schools shall be established for instruction and training in all the different branches of the army and navy. Article 361. No Spaniard may be excused from military service whenever he is properly called upon by law.

CHAPTER II. NATIONAL MILITIA

Article 362. Each province shall have a corps of National Militia composed of its own inhabitants, in proportion to its population and circumstances. Article 363. An ordinance shall regulate the manner of formation of the corps, its number, and especial constitution in all its branches. Article 364. The service of the militia shall not be continuous, and shall take place only when circumstances require it. Article 365. When necessary, the King may dispose of this force within the respective province; but he may not employ it outside the province without consent of the Cortes.

TITLE IX. PU Ii LIC INSTRUCTION CHAPTER I

Article 366. In every town of the monarchy there shall be established primary schools in which children shall be taught reading, writing and

156	

CONSTITUTIONS THAT MADE HISTORY

counting, the catechism of the Catholic religion and a brief exposition of civil obligations. Article 367. Likewise, an adequate number of universities and other establishments of instruction considered necessary for the teaching of all sciences, literature, and fine arts, shall be created and regulated. Article 368. The general plan of instruction shall be uniform throughout the kingdom; the political constitution of the monarchy must be explained in all the universities and literary establishments where ecclesiastical and political sciences are taught. Article 369. There shall be a general directorate of studies, composed of persons of recognized academic standing, who shall be charged under government authority, with the inspection of public education. Article 37o. The Cortes, by means of plans and special statutes, shall regulate whatever pertains to the important object of public instruction. Article 371. All Spaniards have the freedom of writing, printing, and publishing their political ideas without need of license, revision, or any approval previous to publication, subject to the restrictions and responsibility by law.

TITLE X. THE 0 SERVANCE OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE MANNER OF AMENDING IT
Article 372. In its first sessions, the Cortes shall consider the infractions of the constitution of which it is informed, in order to apply the suitable remedy, and to enforce the responsibility of those persons contravening it. Article 373. Every Spaniard has the right to petition the Cortes or the King, claiming the proper observance of the constitution. Article 374. Every public, civil, military, or ecclesiastical officer upon assuming office, shall promise, on oath, to preserve the constitution, to be faithful to the King, and to discharge the duties of his office properly. Article 375. No alteration, addition or reform in any articles of the constitution may be proposed until eight years shall have elapsed from the time at which the constitution shall have been put fully into execution. Article 376. In order to make an alteration, addition, or reform in the constitution, the deputation which is to decree it definitively, must be authorized by special powers for this purpose. Article 377. Any proposal of reform in any article of the constitution must be made in writing and must be supported and signed by twenty deputies at least. Article 378. The proposal of reform shall be read three times with an

Spanish Constitution of 1812	

157

interval of six days between readings, and after the third reading, the Cortes shall determine whether it should be admitted to discussion. Article 379. If admitted to discussion, it shall be treated with the same formalities and methods prescribed for the formation of laws; after these, the Cortes shall vote whether the same shall be discussed again in the next general Cortes; an agreement of two-thirds of the votes is necessary for such declaration. Article 380. The next general Cortes, after the same formalities have been observed, may declare with the concurrence of two-thirds of its sessions, that there is cause for granting special powers to make such amendment. Article 381. This declaration made, it shall be published in, and communicated to, all the provinces and according to the time of declaration, the Cortes shall decide whether the delegates to the next general Cortes, or to the one next immediately succeeding, shall be granted the special powers. Article 382. Such powers shall be granted by the provincial electoral meetings, there shall be added to the ordinary powers, the following clause: Likewise, they grant them special power of making in the constitution the reform mentioned in the decree of Cortes (here the literal decree), the whole according to the provisions of the said constitution. They bind themselves to recognize and consider constitutional, all that shall be decree by virtue thereof.
Article 383. The proposed reform shall be discussed anew, and if approved by two-thirds of the Deputies, it shall become a constitutional law and as such shall be published in the Cortes. Article 384. A committee shall present the decree of reform to the King and he shall cause it to be published and circulated to all the authorities and towns of the Monarchy.

