CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

SPAT N
by GISBERT H. FLANZ & EUGENIO A. HERNANDEZ

Issued June 1974

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1974 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE STATE
THE SPANISH CONSTITUTION

MADRID, 1967

II. FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE STATE

The Organic Law of the State (1/1957) of 10th January FBoletin Oficial del Estado (Official State Bulletin) No. 9, of 11th January) established in its Fourth Transitory Disposition that "within a period of four months as from the promulgation of the present Law, there shall be published the revised texts of the Fundamental Laws, which shall contain the amendments referred to in the additional Provisions of the present Law, after their sanction by the Council of the Realm and their debate by the Council of Ministers". The fundamental character of the Laws to be revised and the permanent nature and unalterability of the principles that inspire them, as proclaimed by Law on 17th May, 1958, and reiterated in the Organic Law of the State, demand that the task of revision must be limited to substituting in the Funr damental Laws the texts amended by the additional Provisions of the Organic Law of the State, deleting them in the revised draft of said Law and, consequently, reflecting in the exposition of motives of the Fuero de los Espanales (Statute Law of the Spanish People), of the Law of the Cortes and of the Law of Succession, the amendments that have been effected in the particular section. Finally, the Fundamental Laws have been arranged systematically and not in the chronological order of their promulgation. In virtue of the fulfilment of the requirements of the aforecited Transitory Regulation, the sanction of the Council of the Realm, and the debate of the Council of Ministers, at their session of the 14th day of April.

I RESOLVE: Article One That the appended revised texts of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom be approved.

Article Two That the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom continue without interruption during the entire period of their enforcement, in the form contained in the Revised Texts, there being derogated whatever dispositions there may be in opposition to the provisions established in said Laws. I so resolve by the present Decree given at El Pardo on the twentieth day of April nineteen hundred and sixty-seven. FRANCISCO FRANCO Witnessed by: LUIS CARRERO BLANCO Under-Secretary of the Presidency of the- Government

1

LAW ON THE PRINCIPLES OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT of 17th May, 1958

I, FRANCISCO FRANCO BAHAMONDE, CAUDILLO OF SPAIN Mindful of my responsibility before God and before History and in the presence of the Cortes of the Kingdom, promulgate the following Principles of the National Movement, as a communion of Spaniards dedicated to the ideals that gave birth to the Crusade:

Spain is a unit of destiny on a universal plane. Service to the unit, to the greatness and liberty of the country is the sacred duty and the 'collective task of every Spaniard.

The Spanish nation regards as a badge of honour its respect for the Law of God, according to the doctrine of the Holy Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, the one true and inseparable faith of the national conscience, which inspires the legislation of the country.

Spain, the root of a great family of peoples, whose ties of brotherhood are indissoluble, aspires to the restoration of justice and peace among nations.

Iv The unity between the peoples and, the domains of Spain is intangible. The integrity of the country and its independence are the supreme exigencies of the national community. The Armed Forces of Spain, the guarantee of her security and the expression of the heroic virtues of her people, must possess the strength necessary for the better service of the country.

V The national community is founded on man, the bearer of eternal values, and on the family, the basis of society; but individual and collective interests must be always subordinate to the common good of the Nation, constituted by generations past, present and future. The Law upholds in equal measure the rights of every Spaniard. VI The natural entities of social life: the Family, the Municipality and the Trade Union, are the basic structures of the national community. The various institutions and corpoi-ations which meet the needs of society in general must be protected, so that they may participate efficaciously in achieving the ends of the national community.

VII The. Spanish people, united by Law and order, cognizant of the postulates of authority, liberty and service, constitute the National State. Their political system is, within the immutable principles of the National Movemeni and the 2

provisions of the Law of Succession and the other Fundamental Laws, a traditional, Catholic, social and representative Monarchy. VIII The representative character of the political system is the basic principle of our public institutions. The participation of the people in the legislative and other functions of general interest shall be implemented through the family, the municipality, the Trade Union and other organically representative bodies recognized by law for this purpose. Any political organization whatever outside this representative system shall be deemed illegal. Every Spaniard has the right of access to public office according to his merit and capacity.

IX Every Spaniard has the right to: impartial adjudication, which shall be free for those lacking economic means; a general and vocational education, which shall never be denied for lack of material means; the benefits of social security and assistance, and an equitable share of the national income and fiscal levies. The Christian ideal of social justice, reflected in the Labour Law, shall inspire the politics and the laws of the nation.

X Work is regarded as the fount of hierarchy, duty and honour for the Spanish people, and private property, in all its forms, as a right conditional on its social function. Private initiative, the foundation of economic activity, must 3

be stimulated, channelled and, if necessary, subsidized by the State, XI Commercial enterprise, the association of men and means geared to production, constitutes a community of interests and a unity of purpose. The relations between the members of the commercial firm must be based on justice and on mutual loyalty, and economic values shall be subordinate to those of a human and social order.

XII The State shall endeavour, by all the means at its disposal, to perfect the physical and moral health of the people, and to ensure for them the highest standards of working conditions; to stimulate the economic progress of the Nation with improvements in agriculture, the expansion of irrigation projects and agrarian reform; to direct the most equitable employment and distribution of public credit; to safeguard and promote the prospecting and exploitation of the mineral resources of the country; to intensify the process of industrialization; to support scientific research; and to protect maritime activities, according to the needs of the entire maritime population and the executive department of the Navy. IN VIRTUE OF WHICH, I RESOLVE:

Article One The Principles contained in the present decree, the synthesis of those inspiring the Fundamental Laws legalized by the Nation on the sixth day of July nineteen hundred 4

and forty-seven, are, by their very nature, permanent and unalterable.

Article Two
All organs and authorities shall be bound to the strictest observance of these Principles. The oath required for investiture with public office shall refer to the text of these Fundamental Principles.

Article Three
All laws and dispositions of whatever nature that injure or defame the Principles proclaimed in the present Fundamental Law of the Rea[m shall be null and void.

5

STATUTE LAW OF THE SPANISH PEOPLE (Fuero de los Espaholes) of 17th July, 1945, amended by the. Organic Law of the State of 10th January, 1967

I, FRANCISCO FRANCO BAHAMONDE, THE ARMED FORCES OF THE NATION:

CAUDILLO OF

SPAIN, HEAD OF STATE AND COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF

Whereas the Spanish Cortes, as the highest organ of participation by the people in the affairs of the State, have, in accordance with the I aw of their creation, drawn up the Fuero de los Espatio/es (Statute Law of the Spanish People), the fundamental text defining the rights and duties of the Spanish people and protecting their guarantees; and bearing in mind, as is the case in the Labour Law, that its principal provisions verify the permanent value of the concept that inspires them and that a large number of its declarations and precepts constitute a faithful adherence to Catholic social doctrine, recently brought up to date by the II Vatican Council and, finally, in view of the amendment introduced in Article Six thereof by the Organic Law of the State, approved subsequent to a national referendum, for the purpose of adapting its text to the declaration of the Council on religious freedom, promulgated on 1st December, 1965, which exacts explicit recognition of this right, in accordance with the second of the Fundamental Principles of the Movement, which stipulates that the doctrine of the Church shall inspire Spanish legislation. 9

I HEREBY RESOLVE THE FOLLOWING: Article The Fuero de los Espatioles, the text of which appears hereinafter, is hereby approved, with the character of a Fundamental Law prescribing the rights and duties of the Spanish people. PRELIMINARY TITLE Article One The Spanish State proclaims as the ruling principle of its acts respect for the dignity, the integrity and the liberty of the human person, recognizing man, the bearer of eternal values and the member of a national community, as the possessor of duties and rights, the exercise of which duties and rights guarantees in an orderly manner the common good'. TITLE 1 DUTIES AND RIGHTS OF THE SPANISH PEOPLE CHAPTER I Article Two All Spaniards owe faithful service to their country, loyalty to the Head of State and obedience to the laws of the nation 2.

The entire Spanish juridical system is based on this principle. 2 See Law on Fundamental Principles, I. The Spanish juridical system is based on this principle.

10

Article Three The Law protects in equal measure the rights of every Spaniard, without preference in respect of classes and without favour in respect of persons 3.

Article Four All Spaniards have a right to the respect of their personal and family honour. Whosoever offends against it, whatever his condition, shall bear the responsibility'.

Article Five Every Spaniard has the right to receive education and instruction and the duty to acquire such education and instruction, either in the family home, or in private or public centres, according to his free choice. The State shall ensure that no talent shall be neglected for lack of economic means 5.

2 See Law on Fundamental Principles, V & IX. The Spanish juridical system is based on this principle. In respect of personal and family honour, Title X of the existing Penal Code, revised by Decree of 28th March, 1963, covers offences against honour. 5 See Law on Fundamental Principles, IX. Decree 193/1967, of 2nd February, prescribes regulations governing obligatory provisions and grants (Articles 12 and 13). The Law on Educational Grants of 19th July, 1944, recognizes, in Article 2 thereof, as entitled to educational grants "every Spaniard morally and intellectually fit to undertake studies, and especially, those lacking the economic means necessary to pursue their profession". Law 45/1960, of 21st July, created the National Fund for Promoting the Principle of Equality of Opportunity.

11

Article Six The profession and practice of the Catholic religion, which is the religion of the Spanish State, shall enjoy official support. The State shall assume the responsibility of protecting religious freedom, which shall be guaranteed by an efficacious juridical machinery, which, at the same time, shall safeguard morals and public order 6. Article Seven Bearing arms in the service of their country is a mark of honour for the Spanish people. All Spaniards are obliged to render this service when called upon to do so within the provisions of the Law 7. Article Eight By law, and in general terms, personal loans as demanded by the interests of the Nation and public needs may be requisitioned 8.
a See Law on Fundamental Principles and the Law regulating the exercise of civil rights and religious freedom, of 26th June, 1967. Formerly, non-Catholics only had the right of not being molested for their religious beliefs, and any external manifestations other than those of the Catholic cult were not allowed; now the State guarantees the defence and protection of religious freedom, within the safe-guard of morals and public order, in accordance with the ruling of the II Vatican Council. The Head of State, in his address on the occasion of presenting the Organic Law, pointed out that the new text of this article had received the approval of the Holy See. The recognition of the Spanish State as of the Catholic confession was stipulated in the Fuero de los Espafioles of 1945, Article 6. Regulation on Recruitment for the Army of 6th April, 1943. See Law on Fundamental Principles, IX. Articles 564, 565, 567 and 569 of the Law of Local Government, complete revised text of 24th June, 1955.

12

Article Nine The Spanish people shall contribute to the support of the public debt according to their economic capacity. No one shall be obliged to pay tributes that have not been established by law passed in the Cortes 9. Article Ten All Spaniards have the right to participate in public functions of a representative nature, through the family, the municipality and the Trade Union, without prejudice nr1°. to other forms of representation as established by law Article Eleven All Spaniards shall be eligible for public office in accordance with their merit and capacity " Article Twelve Every Spaniard may express his ideas freely provided they do not attack the fundamental principles of the State".
See Law on Fundamental Principles, IX. The General Tax Law, of 28th December, 1963, covers this principle in Articles 2 and 3, stipulating that the primary authority to establish ,taxes is exclusively that of the State, and it shall be exercised- by law passed in the Cortes_ (Art. 2). On the other hand, Article 3 stipulates that the disposition of taxes must be based on general principles and the equitable distribution of tax liabilities. See Law on Fundamental Principles, VIII. The Electoral Law of 8th August, 1907, continues in force. " See Law on Fundamental Principles, VIII. Law of State Civil Servants, of 7th February, 1964, especially Article 30. Law on Women's Rights, of 22nd July, 1961. 12 According to Article 3 of the Press and Printing Law, of 18th March, 1966, the Administration cannot apply prior Censorship nor insist on obligatory consultation except in exceptional cases and in time of war, as expressly stipulated in the laws.

13

Article Thirteen Within the territorial limits of the nation, the State guarantees the freedom and the secrecy of correspondence ". Article Fourteen The Spanish people have the right to establish their residence freely within the territorial limits of the nation 14. Article Fifteen No one may enter the domicile of a Spaniard or search said domicile without his consent, unless it be by mandate of the competent authority and in the cases and in the manner established by law ". Article Sixteen Spaniards may gather together and associate freely for lawful purposes and in accordance with the stipulations of the law. The State may create and maintain the organizations it deems necessary for the fulfilment of its ends. The basic norms, which shall become law, shall co-ordinate the exercise of this right with that recognized in the first part of this Article 16. "
Article 192 of the existing Penal Code typifies the offence of violation

of correspondence. The postal ordinance, approved by Decree of 19th May, 1960, guarantees in Article 14 thereof the freedom, secrecy and inviolability of correspondence. Similarly, the Regulation on Postal Services, approved by Decree of 14th May, 1964 (Arts. 26, 27 & 28) covers this guarantee. Article 189 of the Penal Code. Law on Public Order, Article 11, and Penal Code, Articles 191 & 490. " Law of Association, of 24th December 1964, and supplementary norms, approved by Decree of 20th May, 1965.

14

Article Seventeen The Spanish people have a right to juridical security. All the organs of the State shall act in accordance with a hierarchic order with pre-established norms, which may not be arbitrarily interpreted nor altered ".

Article Eighteen No Spaniard may be arrested except in the cases and in the manner prescribed by law. Within seventy-two hours, any person under arrest shall be set free or delivered to the judicial authorities ".

Article Nineteen A person can only be condemned in virtue of a law in force before the commission of the offence, by the sentence of a competent Tribunal and after the hearing and defence of such a person ".

Article Twenty No Spaniard may be deprived of his nationality except for the crime of treason, as defined in the penal laws, or for

Articles 23, 26, 27, 28 & 30 of the Law on the Juridical System of the Administration of the State, of 26th July, 1957. '8 Article 12 of the Law on Public Order, of 30th July, 1959. Local Government Law of 24th June, 1955, Article 263. Article 47 of the Decree of Governors, of 10th October, 1958. The Penal Code typifies the offence of unlawful arrest in Articles 181 and 480-483 thereof. '	 This principle of penal legality is outlined in the existing Penal Code, specifically in Article 2 thereof.

15

entering the military service or assuming public office in a foreign country against the express wish of the Head of State".

Article Twenty-one All Spaniards may direct individual petitions to the Head of State, to the Cortes and to the authorities. Corporations, civil servants and members of the Armed Forces and Institutes may only exercise this right in accordance with the dispositions governing same".

Article Twenty-two The State recognizes and protects the family as a natural institution and the foundation of society, with rights and duties anterior and superior to every positive human law. Matrimony shall be indissoluble. The State shall give special assistance to large families ".

Article Twenty-three Parents are obliged to feed, educate and instruct their children. The State shall suspend the exercise of the

2"

This matter is expounded in Article 23, Nos. 1 and 2 of the Spanish

Civil Code. 21 Law on the Right of Petition, of 22nd December, 1960. Military personnel are subject to the provisions established in Decree 93/1962; of 18th January.
zz

Article 10 of this Law and annotation to paragraphs 2 and 3 of

Declaration XII of the Labour Law. Law on Support of Large Families, of 13th December, 1943, and Regulation for its application, of 31st March, 1944. Article 42 of the Civil Code on Matrimony.

16

patria potestad (rights of paterfamilias) or withheld such privilege from those who do not exercise it honourably, and shall transfer the guardianship and education of minors to those qualified by law to undertake this duty ".

CHAPTER III Article Twenty-four All Spaniards have the right to work and the duty to occupy themselves in some socially useful activity 24.

Article Twenty-five Labour, by virtue of its essentially human condition, cannot be relegated to the material concept of merchandise, nor be the object of any transaction incompatible with the personal dignity of the worker. It is of itself an attribute of honour and merit sufficient to demand the protection and assistance of the State ".

Article Twenty-six The State recognizes the commercial firm as a community contributing technical skill, labour and capital in its various forms, and supports, as a consequence, the right of these elements to participate in the benefits. The State shall ensure that relations between these elements be maintain23 Regulated by the Civil Code, Articles 155 and 171, and by the Law on Primary Education, of 2nd February, 1967 (Article 55). Decree of 11th June, 1958, which approves the revised text of legislation on protection of minors. 24 See Labour Law, Declaration I, 5 & 8. 2' See Labour Law, Declaration I, 2.

17

ed on strictly equitable lines and in a hierarchy that subordinates economic values to human values, to the interests of the Nal!on and to the demands of the common good ".

Article Twenty-seven All workers shall be supported by the State in their right to just and adequate wages, at least to enable them and their families to lead a moral and honourable life 27.

Article Twenty-eight The Spanish State guarantees its workers the security of aid in times of misfortune, and recognizes their right to assistance in old age, and in the event of death, sickness, maternity, work accidents, incapacity, unemployment and other contingencies that may fall within the province of social insurance 28.

Article Twenty-nine The State shall maintain institutions of assistance and shall protect and encourage those created by the Church, by Corporations and by private individuals 29.

"

See Labour Law, Declarations VIII & Xl. See Labour Law, Declaration

2" Labour Law, Declaration X. The Law on the Bases of Social Security, of 28th December, 1965, propounded by Decree of 21st April, 1966, brings together the voluminous legislative provisions on this matter. 22 At the present time, the agency promoting this activity is the Direction General de Beneficencia y Obras Sociales (Department of Assistance and Social Welfare) in the Home Office (GobernaciOn).

18

Article Thirty Private property as the natural means for serving individual, family and social purposes is recognized and protected by the State. All types of property are subordinate to the needs of the Nation and the common good. Wealth cannot remain inactive, be unduly destroyed, or be applied to unlawful ends ".

Article Thirty-one The State shall facilitate to all Spaniards access to the types of property most intimately bound to the human person: family dwelling, inherited land, work tools and articles of daily use".

Article Thirty-two In no case shall the penalty of confiscation of property be imposed. No one may be dispossessed except for reasons of public utility or social interest, subject to the payment of appropriate indemnities, and in accordance with the provisions of the law 32.

e Law on Land Administration and Town Planning, of 12th May, 1956, and Law on Enforced Expropriation of 16th December, 1954. Labour Law, Declaration XII. al Labour Law, Declaration XII, 2.
ax

Law on Enforced Expropriation, of 16th December, 1954.

19

TITLE II THE EXERCISE AND GUARANTEE OF RIGHTS Article Thirty-three The exercise of the rights recognized in this Law (Fuero) cannot militate against the spiritual, national and social unity of Spain 33.

Article Thirty-four The Cortes shall put to the vote the laws' necessary for the exercise of the rights recognized in this Law (Fuero) 34.

Article Thirty-five The provisions of Articles twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen and eighteen may be temporarily suspended by the Government, totally or partially, through a Decree-Law, which shall be limited to determining the extent and duration of the measure's.

Article Thirty-six Any violation of any of the rights declared in this Law (Fuero) shall be sanctioned by the laws, which shall determine the action to be taken before the appropriate juridical authority for their defence and guarantee.

"

Law on Public Order, of 30th July, 1959, Article 2.

34 Law of the Cortes, Article 10, Clause g). 33 Article 35, Law .of the Cortes, Article 13.

20

iii
LABOUR LAW (FUERO DEL TRABAJO). of 9th March, 1938 amended by the Organic Law of the State of 10th January, 1967

Following the Catholic tradition of social justice and the high sense of human values that informed the legislation of our glorious past, the State assumes the task of offering to every Spaniard the guarantee of a country, the means of, survival and justice. In order to achieve this aim — at the same time, fortifying the unity, the liberty and the greatness of Spain — it operates at the social level with the desire to place the wealth of the nation at the service of the Spanish people, subordinating the economy to the dignity of the human person, mindful of his material needs and the demands of his intellectual, moral, spiritual and religious life. And in the light of its conception of Spain as a unit of destiny, it makes manifest, through the present declarations, its design that the produce of Spain, within the bonds of brotherhood that unite all its elements, should constitute a unit of service towards the strengthening of the country and for the common good of all Spaniards. The Spanish State sets forth these declarations, which shall inspire her social and economic policy, under the precepts of justice and with the desire and determination that those who have laboured for the country constitute, by virtue of their honour, valour and work, the highest aristocracy of this national epoch. Before the Spanish people, irrevocably united in sacrifice and hope, we declare: 1. Work is the participation of man in production through the voluntary exercise of his intellectual and manual

23

faculties, according to his particular vocation, in keeping with the decorum and comfort of his life, and for the better development of the national economy''. 2. By virtue of its essentially personal and human nature, labour cannot be reduced to a material concept of merchandise, nor be the object of any transaction incompatible with the personal dignity of the worker''. 3. The right to work is a consequence of the duty imposed on man by God, for the fulfilment of his individual aims and the prosperity and greatness of the country. 4. The State values and exalts labour, the fruitful expression of the creative spirit of man, and in this sense, shall protect it with the force of law, giving it the highest consideration and making it compatible with the fulfilment of the other individual, family and social ends of life 38. 5. Work, as a social duty, shall be demanded, in some form or another, of every able-bodied Spaniard, and shall be considered a compulsory tribute to the national patrimony ". 6. Labour is one of the most noble attributes of hierar-

"

This definition of work is to be found in Article 1 of the Decree

of 26th January, 1944, which approves the revised text of the Law on the Contracting of Labour. See Fuero de los Espaholes (Statute Law of the Spanish People), Article 25. With the single purpose of honouring merit in work, the Royal Decree of 22nd January, 1926, created the Medal of Labour, re-established by Decree of 14th March, 1942. The protection of labour is manifested, among other ways, through fiscal reductions; perhaps the most characteristic form is that of the general tax on the income of persons (Income Law of 8th April, 1967). Sge Law on Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, X. " See Fuero de los Espaholes (Statute Law of the Spanish People), Article 24.

24

chy and honour, and is sufficient in itself to demand the assistance and protection of the State'''. 7. Service is work undertaken with heroism, disinterest or self-sacrifice, with a will to contribute to the higher good that Spain represents. 8. Every Spaniard has the right to work. The execution of this right is a fundamental mission of the State 41.

1. The State undertakes to employ constant and effective action in defence of the worker, his life and his work. It shall limit the length of the working day to a fixed number of hours, and shall extend to labour every guarantee of a defensive and humanitarian order, In particular, it shall prohibit the employment of women and children for night work, regulate work done at home and shall liberate the married woman from the workshop and the factory 42.
44' This type of assistance is expounded the Social Security regulations

(Law of 28th December, complete text Decree of 21st April, 1956) and the provisions of the Labour Mutuality, and, in general, all the activities of the Ministry of Labour are linked with it. See; Fuero de los Espanoles (Statute Law of Spaniards), Article 29. ' 41 See Fuero de los Espanoles, Article 24. The/ Law on the Maximum Number. of Working Hours, of 9th September, 1931, is still in force. It fixes, as a maximum, a working day of eight hours or 48 hours a week, in accordance with the Washington Agreement of 29th October, 1929. This general norm is applied to the different fields df endeavour by the respective Labour Regulations. The work of women and children is regulated in Articles 162-179 of the Law on the Contracting of Labour; Article 4 of the Law on the Rights of Women, of 22nd July, 1961, and Decree of 26th July, i957, which indicates the different types of work prohibited for women and children. Work done at home is covered by Articles 116-121 of the Law on the Contracting of Labour. See Law on Fundamental Principles of the National Movement.

25

2. The State shall maintain that the observance of Sunday as a day of rest is a sacred condition of labour". 3. The laws shall make obligaiory the observance of religious festivals and holidays proclaimed by the State, without loss of retribution, the technical necessities of the firms involved being taken into account". 4. The 18th July, marking the beginning of the Glorious Rising, now a national holiday, shall be considered as a Festival in honour of the Exaltation of Labour. 5. Every worker shall have a right to an annual paid vacation so that he may have a period of rest, and the institutions responsible for the fulfilment of this provision shall organize themselves accordingly ". 6. The necessary institutions shall be created to give workers access to all the cultural, entertainment, military, health and sports facilities during their leisure hours".
III

1. Wages shall be the minimum necessary to enable the worker to lead a moral and honourable life 47. 2. A family allowance shall be established through the appropriate agencies 48.
The Law on Sunday Observance, of 13th July, 1940, and Regulation of 25th January, 1941. " The official calendar of holidays is contained in the Decrees of 26th December, 1957, 10th January, 1958, and 24th September, 1958. The Ministry of Labour publishes every year the calendar of local holidays. The general regulation on vacation is contained in Article 35 of the Law on the Contracting of Labour. Articles 77 foil. and 91 foil. of the Order of 9th March, 1946, approving the Statute on trade union assistance. The present minimum salary, according to Decree 2342/1967 of 21st September, is Ptas. 96 a day, See Fuero de los Espaitoles, Article 27. The first Law on Family Allowances was promulgated on 18th June, 1938. The family bonus was introduced by Bank regulation and was generally

26

The standard of living shall be raised gradually and rigidly for the workers, as allowed by the higher interests of the Nation ". 4. The State shall fix the minimum bases for the Administration of labour, and the relations between the workers and the firms employing them shall be subject to these provisions. The prime considerations of such relations shall be the contribution of labour and remuneration therefor, as well as the relationships of the various components of the firm, based on justice, mutual loyalty and the subordination of economic values to those of a human and social order ". 5. Through the Trade Union, the State shall seek to discover whether the economic and other conditions of work are in keeping with the just deserts of the worker 51.

3.

applied by Ministry of Labour Order of 29th March, 1946, amended by another Order of 24th January, 1956. Both were revised by the Law of 14th April, 1962, which created a unified system of family assistance recognized in Article 44, point 11, of the Law of Social Security, of 28th, December, 1963. " Article 1 of the Law of 28th December, 1963, approving the Economic & Social Development Plan, indicates its object as being "to bring about a rise in the standard of living of all Spaniards, within the realms of social justice, and encourage the evolution of liberty and the dignity of the person". 56 Within the general competence of the Ministry of Labour, Article 1 of the Decree of 18th February, 1960, which approves its organic Regulation, it is the duty of the Direction General de Ordenacien del Triabajo (Department for the Administration of Labour), according to Article 71, "to plan, implement and develop the policy and administrative methods which are the functions of the State in respect of labour relations". 5' Article I of the Law of 26th January, 1941 on Trade Unions: "The Trade Union Organization is the only one recognized by the State as having the necessary machinery to inform the State of the aspirations and needs of the producing elements of the Nation on the economic and social plane, and is, at the same time, the vehicle through which the directives of the State are made known to the producing elements".

27

6. The State shall ensure the safety and continuity of labour ". 7. The commercial firm shall inform its staff of the progress of production to the degree necessary to stimulate their sense of responsibility, according to the terms established by law 53 IV Handicraft — the inheritance of a glorious past — shall be promoted and protected, being the result of the complete projection of the human person in his work and a type of production divorced from both the capitalist system of mass labour and Marxist gregariousness ".

1. The standards of employment in the agricultural enter prise shall be adapted to its special characteristics and to the seasonal variations imposed by nature ".
Stability of employment is guaranteed in Article 79 of the Law on the Contracting of Labour. Order of 31st January, 1940, approving the General Regulation on Safety and Hygiene in Places of Work. The Order of 6th February, 1961, in application of Decree of 12th January, 1961, giving norms for the draftingof Regulations governing the Internal Administration of each firm, stipulates that such Regulations shall specify the appropriate safety measures taken. " Law of 21st July, 1962, which covers the participation of staff in the management and administration of firms falling in the category of companies. The Decree of 18th August, 1947, which creates the Jury System in Firms, stipulates that they "must be informed of the general progress of production, prospects as regards orders, supplies, materials, etc.". Article 85 foll, of the Order of 9th March, 1946, creating the Handicrafts Trade Union. Law of 16th October, 1942, which establishes the norms governing the preparation of Labour Regulations. Decree of 25th March, 1955, on

28

2. The State shall take a special interest in the technical education of the agricultural producer, training him to carry out all the activities required by each unit of exploitation 56. 3. The prices of principal products shall be controlled and re-assessed, in order to ensure a minimum profit under normal conditions for the agricultural entrepreneur and, in consequence, to demand for the workers wages that shall enable them to improve their living conditions 57. 4. 'Efforts shall be made to grant to each peasant family a small plot of land, which would contribute to their basic needs and keep them occupied during unemployment 58. 5. Plans shall be made for the embellishment of rural life, perfecting the rural dwelling and improving the sanitary conditions of the towns and villages of Spain. 6. The State shall ensure tenants of some stability in the cultivation of the land through long-term contracts, which shall protect them against unjustifiable eviction and shall secure for them the amortization of the improvements made by them on the land. It is the aim of the State to arbitrate through the appropriate channels so that, under

agricultural workers. See Law on Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, XII. There exist for this purpose the Trade Union Organization for Vocational Training, for Training in Livestock Farming (the Youth Front), and for Housing Development; the Department for the Education of Farm Workers and its National Foundation for Secondary and Vocational Education; the Department for Social Advancement and its Labour Universities; and, more specifically, the Department of Agrarian Training. This aim has guided the price policy followed by the Supplies and Transport Agency and has justified the creation of entities such as the National Wheat Board and the Commission for the Purchase of Wine Surpluses. Law of 15th July, 1952, on family patrimonies.

29

fair conditions, the land may belong to those who work it ". VI The State shall direct its greatest attention to maritime workers, providing them with adequate institutions to avoid the depreciation of their merchandise and to facilitate their access to the ownership of the articles necessary for carrying on their trade 60

VII A new Labour Magistrature shall be created, based on the principle that this function of justice belongs to the State 61.

VIII
1. Capital is an instrument of production. 2. The commercial firm, as a producing unit, shall dispose the elements within it in a hierarchy that subordinates instrumental factors to human factors, all towards the common good. 3. The management of the firm shall be responsible for its contribution to the common good of the national economy.

"

Decree of 29th April, 1959, which outlines in Article 10 thereof the

right of extension of farming tenancies. 8° Organic Law, of 18th October, 1940, which created the Social Marine Institute. " Decree of 13th May, 1938, on the new Labour Magistrature, whose Organic Law is dated 17th October, 1940 and whose procedure is regulated in Decree of 21st April, 1966. Decree of 9th January, 1963, approving the revised text of the Labour Process legislation.

30

4. The profit of the firm, a fair interest on capital taken into account, shall be applied preferably to the formation of the reserves necessary for its stability, to the improvement of production, and to the betterment of the working and living conditions of the workers ".

IX 1. Credit shall be so arranged that, besides fulfilling its purpose of developing national wealth, it shall contribute to the creation and maintenance of the small agricultural, fishing, industrial or commercial patrimony". 2. Integrity and trustworthiness, based on the competence and the work of the individual, shall be considered as effective guarantees for the granting of credit'''. 3. The State shall investigate all forms of usury 65.

4 Article 106 of the Law on Stock Companies, of 17th July, 1951, which establishes an obligatory reserve, with which the so-called extraordinary and voluntary reserves co-exist (Art. 103). Article 53, 2, b) of the Law on Tax Reform, which grants a reduction of 90% on the base of capital income tax in favour of the interest on the loans granted by firms to their staff for acquiring their own homes, Article 76 of the Law on Tax Reform, which treats as deductible expenses, on the general income tax of juridical associations, different items which directly contrjbute to the improvement of the worker's living conditions. See Fuero de los Espaiioles, Article 26, and Law on the Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, X. " Law of 2nd January, 1942 and Regulation of 11th November, 1963, on co-operatives (Decree of 16th June, 1954, on entities of agricultural credit). See Law on Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, XII. The repression of usury is covered by two aspects of the law: the civil, on the nullification of contracts on usurious loans, under Law of 23rd July, 1908 (the Azcirate Law); and the penal, through the sanctions contained in Chapter y iy Title III, Book II, of the Penal Code, revised In 1966.

31

X 1. The social welfare authorities shall offer the worker the security of aid in misfortune 66. 2. There shall be an increase in social insurance for old age; incapacity, maternity, work accidents, ailments caused by one's profession, tuberculosis and unemployment, with a view to establishing a comprehensive insurance system. The granting of an adequate pension to aged workers shall receive prime consideration.

XI

National production is an economic unit in the service of the country. It is the duty of every Spaniard to protect, improve and increase it. All factors involved in production are subordinate to the supreme interests of the Nation 67. 2. Any illegal act, whether individual or collective, that seriously hinders production or attempts against it shall be punishable by law 68. 3. The fraudulent decrease of work output shall be subject to the appropriate penalties 69. 4. In general, the State shall only engage in business entreprise when private initiative is lacking, or when the higher interests of the Nation demand it 70..
aa Law on Bases of Social Security, of 28th December, 1963. as Laws of 24th October, 1939 (protecting industries of national interest) and, 24th November, 1939 (on the regulating and defence of national industry). a' Article 232 of the Penal Code, whose text is based on Law of 21st December, 1965. e'a Law on the Contracting of Labour, Articles 60, 63, 77, d) and f); and Decree of 21st September, 1960, Article 5, sub-paragraphs 1 and 2. " Law of 25th September, 1941, which created the National Institute of Industry with the ends outlined in Article 1 thereof. Article 4 of the Law on the Development Plan, of 28th December, 1963.. See Law on the Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, X.

1.

32

5. The State, acting independently or through the Trade Unions, shall check all disloyal competition in the realms of production, as well as those activities that hamper the normal development of the national economy, and shall encourage, on the other hand, all efforts aimed at improving the national economy". 6. The State regards private initiative as the source of the economic life of the Nation 72.

XII 1. The State recognizes and protects private propertyas a natural means for the execution of individual, family and social functions. All forms of property are subordinate to the supreme interests of the Nation, whose interpreter is the State". 2. The State assumes the task of increasing and making accessible to all Spaniards the types of property vitally linked to the human person: the family home, the patri-

"

Law of 20th July, 1963 on restrictive practices of competition, which

created the Tribunal for the Defence of Competitior and the Agency for the Defence of Competition. 72 Law on the Development Plan, which is binding for the public sector and merely indicative for the private. " Law on Enforced Expropriation, of 16th December, 1954, especially Article 1; Law of 27th April, 1946 on expropriation of rural properties of social interest; Law of 3rd December, 1953, on properties manifestly capable of improvemenit; Law on Land Development by the distribution of plots, of 20th December, 1952; Law of 15th July, 1954 on minimum units of cultivation, and Law of 11Th May, 1959 on the enforced transer of rural properties. See Fuero de los Espaiioles, Article 30, and Law on the Fundamental Principles of the National Movement, X.

33

mony of land and the instruments or work implements needed for daily use 74. 3. The State recognizes the family as the natural nucleus and foundation of society, and at the same time, as the moral institution endowed with inalienable rights and superior to all positive law. For the greater security of its conservation and continuity, the unseizable family patrimony shall be recognized 75.

XIII 1. Spaniards, by virtue of their participation in labour and production, constitute the Trade Union Organization. 2. The Trade Union Organization is made up of a number of industrial, agrarian and public utility unions, •with activities on a territorial and national scale covering all aspects of production. 3. The trade unions shall have the status of public corporations on a representative basis, with iuridical standing and full functional capacity in their respective spheres of competence. Within these spheres, and in the manner legally established, shall be formed the associations of management, technicians and •workers, organized for the "
Law of 15th July, 1952, on family patrimonies and Decree of 27th

January, 1957, on protected family farm holdings; Law on Protected Dwellings, of 19th April, 1939, which created the Institute of Housing, and its Regulation (Decree of 2nd September, 1939); Law on Subsidized Housing, of 26th November, 1954, which established the first national housing scheme, etc. See Fuero de los Espanoles, Article 31. Law of 13th December, 1943 and its Regulation, published by Decree of 31st March, 1954. There exist a number of fiscal and tax reductions, as well as family assistance for civil servants established by Law of 15th June, 1954. For other workers, see Law on the Bases of Social Security and Law on Fundamental Principles of National Movement, VI.

34

defence of their particular interests, and as a free and representative medium of participation in trade union activities and, through the trade unions, in the community tasks of political, • economic and social life. 4. The trade unions are the channel of professional and economic interests for the fulfilment of the ends of the national community, and are the representatives of said interests. 5. The trade unions collaborate in the study of production problems, and may propose solutions and intervene in the regulation, vigilance and implementation of working conditions. 6. The trade unions may create and maintain agencies for research, moral, cultural and professional training, welfare, aid and other activities of a social nature of interest to the participants of production. 7. Placement bureaux for finding employment for the worker in accordance with his aptitude and merit shall be established. is the function of the trade unions to supply the 8. State with precise data for the preparation of production statistics. 9. The Trade Union Law shall determine the manner of incorporating into the new organization the existing economic and professional associations.

XIV The State shall dictate the appropriate measures for the protection of national labour within the territorial limits of the country and, by virtue of labour treaties with other governments, shall seek to protect the employment of Spanish workers resident abroad". "
The Spanish Institute of Emigration was created by Law of 17th

July, 1956, amended by Decree of 23rd July, 1959, and 3rd May, 1963.

35

XV At the time of promulgating this Charter, Spain is e gaged in a heroic military tesk for the salvation of spiritual values and world culture, at the risk of losing a large share of her material resources. National production, with„ all its elements, must respond unselfishly to the generosity of the militant youth of the Nation and of Spain herself. For this reason, in this Charter of rights and duties, the most urgent consideration is that the productive elements should contribute equitably and resolutely to the renewal of Spanish soil and the foundations of its power.

XVI The State undertakes to absorb the militant youth into the ranks of labour, honour or leadership, by virtue of their right as Spaniards and their conquest as heroes.

There are treaties in existence ensuring Social Security and assistance to Spaniards resident in the following countries: Germany, Argentina, Belgium, Chile, France, Holland, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal and the Dominican Republic.

36

IV

THE ORGANIC LAW OF THE STATE of 10th January, 1967

Over the past three decades, the State which came into existence on 18th July, 1936, has performed a gigantic task of reconstruction in every order of national life. Fundamental legislation has kept pace with the major necessities of the country, achieving, thanks to its gradual promulgation, the firm establishment of institutions, while at the same time preserving them from confusing rectifications, which would have been the inevitable consequence of premature decisions. The laws so far promulgated cover the greater part of the questions dictated by an institutional system of administration. The Law on the Principles of the Movement provide the directives governing Spanish policy and serve as a permanent guide and an- unalterable code for all legislative and governmental action. The Fuero de los Esparioles (Statute Law of the Spanish People) and the Labour Law define the duties and rights of Spaniards and protect the exercise of such duties and rights. The Law of Referendum submits to the .consideration and direct decision of the people, the draft laws which circumstances or public interest demand. The Law of the Cortes establishes the composition and prerogatives of the highest organ for the participation of the Spanish people in the affairs of the State. And the Law of Succession contains the declaration that Spain is a political unit, constituted as a Kingdom, and creates the Council of the Realm, which

39

must assist the Head of State in all matters and resolutions coming under his exclusive competence. Nevertheless, the juridical vitality and the political vigour of the Regime, its ability to cope with present problems and the prospects offered by the extended period of its existence, permit and advocate the expansion and improvement of a fundamental legislation. The time has come to close the chapter on the institutionalization of the national State; to delimit the ordinary attributes of the supreme magistrature of the State upon the fulfilment of the provisions of the Law of Succession; to determine the composition of the Government, the procedure for the nomination and retirement of its members, its responsibility and what it regards as improper; to establish the organization and functions of the National Council; to give a fundamental character to the structure of the Judicature, the Armed Forces and Public Administration; to regulate the relations between the Headship of State, the Cortes, the Government and the Council of the Realm; to determine the manner of designation, the term of office and the retirement of the Speaker of the Cortes and the Presiding Officers of the highest Tribunals and consultative bodies; and to open a juridical channel for the impugnment of any legislative or governmental act that may be detrimental to the system of Fundamental Laws. These are the ends of the present Law, which will perfect and place the institutions of the Regime in a harmonious system, and ensure in an effective manner for the future the fidelity of the highest organs of the State to the Principles of the .National Movement. IN VIRTUE WHEREOF, and in the exercise of the legislative faculty conferred on me by the Laws of 30th January, 1938, and 8th August, 1939, pursuant to the agreement of the Spanish Cortes adopted in plenary session. of 22nd November, 1966, and with the legal and direct expression of the Spanish people, manifested by the approval of

40

85.50 per cent of the electorate, which represent 95.86 per cent of voters, in the national Referendum held on 14th December, 1966, I RESOLVE:

TITLE I THE NATIONAL STATE Article One I. The Spanish State, constituted as a kingdom, is the supreme institution of the national community n. II. The State is responsible for the exercise of sovereignty through the agencies that implement its functions.

Article Two I. National sovereignty is one and indivisible, and is not subject to delegation or cession. II. The institutional system of the Spanish State is based on the principles of unity of power and co-ordination of functions.

Article Three The fundamental ends of the State are: the defence of unity, among the peoples and domains of Spain; the maintenance of the integrity, independence and security of the Nation; the safeguarding of the spiritual and material patrimony of the Spanish people; the protection of the rights of the individual, of the family and of society; and "
The character of the kingdom is defined in the Law of Succession in

the Headship of State, of 26th July, 1947 (Article 1).

41

the promotion of a just social order in which all private interests are subordinated to the common good. These ends are inspired by, and are absolutely faithful to, the Principles of the National Movement, promulgated by the fundamental Law of 17th May, 1958, which are, by reason of their very nature, permanent and unalterable.

Article Four
The National Movement, the communion of the Spanish people in the Principles cited in the preceding Article, informs the political system, open to all Spaniards, and, for the better service of the country, promotes political life on the basis of an orderly concurrence of criteria.

Article Five
The national flag is composed of three horizontal stripes — red, yellow and red — the yellow stripe being double the width of the red. TITLE II THE HEAD OF STATE

Article Six
The Head of State is the supreme representative of the Nation; personifies national sovereignty; exercises supreme political and administrative power; is vested with the National Leadership of the Movement and ensures the strictest observance of its Principles and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, as well as the continuity of the State and of the National Movement; guarantees and ensures the regular functioning of the high organs of the State and the proper co-ordination between such organs; 42

sanctions and promulgates laws and provides for their execution; exercises the supreme command of the Army, Navy and Air Force; safeguards the maintenance of public order at home and the security of the State abroad; lends his name to the administration of justice; exercises the prerogative of pardon; confers, in accordance with the law, appointments, public office and honours; accredits and receives diplomatic representatives; and performs whatever acts are required of him by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Article Seven
The Head of State is particularly required to: a) convoke the Cortes in accordance with the law, as also to preside at the opening session of each legislative term and, with the agreement of the Government, to deliver the inaugural address and other messages; b) prorogue for the necessary period, at the instance of the Cortes or of the Government and with the agreement of the Council of the Realm, a legislative term when some grave cause may impede the normal replacement of the Deputies; c) submit to national referendum the Bills referred to in paragraph two of Article ten of the Law of Succession and Article one of the Law of Referendum 18;

"

Paragraph one of Article 10 of the Law of Succession in the Headship

of State, of 26th July, 1947, enumerates the Fundamental Laws, and paragraph two stipulates that "in order to derogate or amend them, a nat;onal referendum, besides the agreement of the Cortes, shall be necessary". To this list must be added the Law of 17th May, 1958, which promulgates the Principles of the National Movement, Article 30 of which states: "All laws and dispositions of whatever nature that injure of defame the Principles proclaimed in the present Fundamental Law of the Realm shall be null and void".

43-

appoint and relieve of their functions the President d) of the Government, the Speaker of the Cortes and other holders of high office, in the manner prescribed by law 79; e) convoke and preside over the Council of Ministers and the National Defence Junta when he attends their meetings ". preside, should he think it advisable, over the debates f) of the Council of the Realm and of the National Council, provided that those of the former do not refer to his person or to the heirs to the Crown. In no case will voting take place in the presence of the Head of State; seek the advice and guidance of the Council of the g) Realm; request reports of the National Council. h)

Article Eight I. The person of the Head of State is inviolable. All Spaniards shall owe him respect and obeisance. II. All resolutions made by the Head of State in the exercise of his authority must be approved, according to the circumstances, by the President of the Government or the Minister concerned, by the Speaker of the Cortes or by the President of the Council of the Realm, any disposition that does not comply with this formality being invalid ". III. The persons approving the acts of the Head of State shall be responsible therefor. "
See Article 14-1 and additional disposition Ill of this Law (Article 7

of the Law of the Cortes). See Article 13 of this Law.
The requirement that Decrees should be signed by the Head of State

and approved by the appropriate Minister, or President of the Government, in the event of their affecting various Ministries, was already covered in Article 24 of the Law of. Juridical Procedure of the Administration of the State (revised text of 26th July, 1957).

44

Article Nine The Head of State shall require a Law or, where applicable, the agreement or authorization of the Cortes, in the following cases: a) to ratify international treaties or agreements which affect the full sovereignty or the integrity of Spanish territory; b) to declare war and agree to peace; c) to put into effect the acts referred to in Article Twelve of the Law of Succession and those that may be defined in other precepts of the Fundamental Laws of the Realm 82.

Article Ten The Head of State shall be assisted by the Council of the Realm: a) to propose to the Cortes those acts which, according to the provisions of the preceding article, require a law, the agreement or the authorization of the Cortes; b) to return to the Cortes for further study a law drawn up by the Cortes; c) to prorogue a legislative term for grave reasons and for the required period; d) to take exceptional measures when external security, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the institutional system of the Kingdom are exposed to serious and imminent threat, giving a documented account to the Cortes; e) to submit to national referendum Bills (draft laws) of
Article 12 of the Law of Succession establishes that "all cession of rights before mounting the throne, abdications when the successor has been designated, renunciations in any case and royal marriages, as well as marriages of immediate successors, shall be made known by the Council of the Realm and approved by the Cortes of the Nation".

45

major importance when such a referendum is not mandatory; f) to take the other decisions for which a Fundamental Law may establish this requisite. Article Eleven During the absence of the Head of State from the national territory, or in case of ill health, his functions shall be assumed by the heir to the Crown, should there be one and should he be over thirty years of age; or in default thereof, by the Regency Council., In any case, the President of the Government shall give an account to the Cortes. Article Twelve The guardianship of the royal persons not of age included in the succession, or of the incapacitated King shall be approved by the Cortes at the proposal of the Council of the Realm. The designation must devolve upon a person of Spanish nationality professing the Catholic religion, and is incompatible with the exercise of the Regency, the Presidency of the Government or the Presidency of the Cortes. TITLE III THE GOVERNMENT OF THE NATION Article Thirteen I. The Head of State directs the government of the Kingdom through the Council of Ministers".
The prerogatives of the Head of State are specified in Article 7 of this Law and, specifically in respect of the Government, in subparagraphs d) and e).

46

The Council of Ministers, composed of the President of the Government, the Vice-President or Vice-Presidents, should they exist, and the Ministers, is the organ that determines national policy, ensures the application of the laws, exercises its power to make regulations and constantly assists the Head of State in political and administrative matters". III. The decisions of the Government shall always have the approval of the President of the Government or of the Minister concerned.

Article Fourteen

I. The President of the Government must be a Spaniard and shall be appointed by the Head of State from among three candidates proposed by the Council of the Realm ". II. His term of office shall be for five years. Fifteen days prior to the expiry of this term, the Council of the Realm shall submit the proposal mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Ill. The office of President of the Government shall carry the restrictions and incompatibilities prescribed by law. IV. It is incumbent on the President of the Government to represent the Government of the Nation, to direct general policy and to ensure the co-ordination of all the organs of government and administration. V. The President of the Government, in the name of the "
The composition and competence of the Council of Ministers are

specified in Titles I and II, chapter of revised text of Law of Juridical Procedure of the Administration of the State, of 26th July, 1957. The office of President of the Government as an agent of the Administration of the State was established in Law of 26th July, 1957. His faculties, as well as those of the Ministers, are specified in Chapter II of Title II of said Law. The change in the new Law refers to a reform in the nomination, the duration of the term of office, and termination of same.

47

Head of State, exercises the National Leadership of the Movement, assisted by the National Council and the Secretary-General ".

Article Fifteen
The President of the Government shall retire from office: a) upon expiry of his term of office; b) at his own request, once his resignation has been accepted by the Head of State, having been made known to the Council of the Realm. c) upon the decision of the Head of State, in agreement with the Council of the Realm. d) upon the proposal of the Council of the Realm, because of incapacity recognized by two-thirds of its members.

Article Sixteen
I. In the event of the death of the President of the Government, or in the event of any of the possibilities under sub-paragraphs b), c) and d) of the preceding article, his functions shall be assumed by the Vice-President or Vice-Presidents, in the order established, or, should there be no Vice-President, by the Minister appointed by the Head of State. II. Within a period of ten days, a new President shall be nominated in the manner established in Article fourteen.

The National Leadership of the Movement is vested for life in the person of Francisco Franco, Caudillo of Spain, according to Transitory Disposition One, Ill, of this Law. For the National Council and the Secretary-General, see Title IV of this Law.

48

Article Seventeen I. The other members of the Government shall be Spaniards and their nomination and retirement from office shall be effected by the Head of State at the proposal of the President of the Government. II. Their posts shall carry the restrictions and incompatibilities prescribed by law. Article Eighteen The members of the Government shall retire from office: a) on the retirement of the President of the Government; b) at the instance of the President of the Government, with the approval of the Head of State; c) at their own request, when their resignation has been accepted by the Head of State, at the proposal of the President of the Government. Article Nineteen Before taking office, the President and the other members of the Government, shall swear an oath of allegiance to the Head of State; in his presence, to the Principles of the National Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and shall undertake to keep their deliberations secret". Article Twenty I. The President and other members of the Government are jointly responsible for the decisions taken by the
Decree 2.148, of 10th August, 1963, determines the formula of the oath upon taking public office. Before taking office, the Ministers shall swear allegiance to the Head of State and to the National Regime (Article 16 of Law of 30th January, 1938).

49

Council of Ministers. Each of them shall be accountable for the acts executed by him or authorized by him in his Department. li. The penal liability of the President and of the other members of the Government, and the civil liability for acts related to the exercise of their functions, shall be subject to the Supreme Court of Justice, in plenary session ". TITLE IV THE NATIONAL COUNCIL Article Twenty-one As the collegiate representative of the Movement, the National Council has the following functions 89: a) to strengthen the bonds of unity among the people and domains of Spain; b) to defend the integrity of the Principles of the National Movement and to ensure that the transformation and development of the economic, social and cultural ° structure are adapted to the demands of social justice; c) to safeguard the development and exercise of the rights and liberties recognized by the fundamental laws and to stimulate the real and efficacious participation of the natural entities and of public opinion in political affairs; to contribute to the training of Spanish youth in d)

The liability of the State, of its authorities and of its functionaries is regulated in Title IV of the Law of 26th July, 1957, already cited in previous notes. " The National Council of the Movement was established by Decree of 19th April, 1937 and regulated by Decrees of 31st July, 1939 and 23rd November, 1947. Its specific Regulation is dated 20th December, 1942.

50

allegiance to the Principles of the National Movement and to bring new generations into the collective entreprise; e) to channel, within the Principles of the Movement, a' contrast of opinion on political action; f) to safeguard the permanence and standards of the National Movement itself.

Article Twenty-two The National Council shall be composed of the following Members 90: a) one Member elected for each province, in the manner established by the appropriate organic Law; b) forty Members appointed by the Caudillo from among persons who have rendered services of proven worth; upon the fulfilment of succession provisions, these forty Members shall be made permanent until the age of seventy-five, and such vacancies as may arise subsequently shall be filled by election from among three candidates proposed by this group of Members to the Plenary Session of the Council "; c) twelve Members representing the basic structures of the national community: — four elected from among their members by the Deputies of the Cortes representing the family; — four elected from among their members by the Deputies of the Cortes representing the local Corporations; — four elected from among their members by the

L'9

The composition, of the National Council prior to the new Organic

Law of the State was determined by Decree of 3rd March, 1965 and by Decree of 22nd April, 1964. " The system established allows for the maintenance of a future spirit of homogeneity through this group of Members, whose vacancies are filled by candidates proposed by the Members themselves.

51

Deputies of the Cortes representing the Trade Union Organization; d) six Members ,.. appointed by the President of the Council from among persons rendering services relevant to the functions enumerated in the preceding article; e) the Secretary-General, who shall exercise the functions of Vice-President. Article Twenty-three In order to carry out the functions outlined in Article Twenty-one, the National Council shall have the following duties: a) promoting the adjustment of the laws and general dispositions to the Principles of the National Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, exercising for this purpose the appeal of contrafuero (infringement of charter) prescribed under Title X of this Law 92; b) recommending to the Government whatever measures it may consider appropriate for the greater effectiveness of the Principles of the Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom and, at all events, being apprised,, of and investigating, before submission to the Cortes, any Bill or amendment to a Fundamental Law; c) bringing to the notice of the Government such reports or memoranda it may consider convenient, and executing the assignments entrusted to it by the Government, having the power, in such cases, to examine the antecedents it may consider necessaty. Article Twenty-four The National Council shall function in plenary session and through a Standing Committee, in accordance with the requirements of its organic Law. " 52
The appeal of contrafuero is regulated in Title X of this Law.

Article Twenty-five The President of the Government, in his capacity as National Leader of the Movement by delegation of the Head of State, shall exercise the Presidency of the National Council and of its Standing Committee, with the assistance of the Secretary-General, to whom he may delegate such functions as he sees fit 93.

Article Twenty-six The Secretary-General shall 'be appointed by the Head of State, at the proposal of the President of the Government. The office of Secretary-General shall carry the restrictions and incompatibilities prescribed by law.

Article Twenty-seven I. The President of the National Council shall retire from office when he ceases to be President of the Government. II. The Secretary-General shall retire from office: a) upon the retirement of the President of the Goverment; b) at the instance of the President of the Government, with the approval of the Head of State; c) at his own request, when his resignation has been accepted by the Head of State at the proposal of the President of the Government.

Transitory Disposition One, Number 111, of this Law rules that the National Leadership of the Movement devolves upon, the Caudillo for life; it shall only pass to the President of the Government when delegated by the Head of State, the dispositions of the succession having been fulfilled.

53

III. The Members of the National Council shall retire from office: a) at the end of their term of office for groups a) and c); upon reaching the age of seventy-five for group b); and at the decision of the President of the Council for group d); b) at their own request, when their resignation has been accepted by the Head of State at the proposal of the President of the Council; c) because of incapacity recognized by the Council; for such other reasons as may cause their retirement d) as Deputies of the Cortes.

Article Twenty-eight An organic Law shall establish the norms governing the National Council. TITLE V

THE JUDICIARY
Article Twenty-nine The Judiciary shall enjoy complete independence. Justice shall be administered in the name of the Head of State, in accordance with the law, by Judges and Magistrates who shall be independent, immovable and responsible, as prescribed by law ". "
A reiteration of Fundamentai Principle IX of those sanctioned by

Law of 17th May, 1958: "Every Spaniard has the right to impartial adjudication...". Article 1 of the Organic Law of Judicial Power stipulated that: "Justice shall be administered in the name of the King". The quality of immovability seems to have been sanctioned in Article 9

54

Article Thirty Every Spaniard shall have free access to the Courts of Justice. Adjudication shall be free for those lacking economic means ".

Article Thirty-one The jurisdictional function, judgment and the execution of judgment, in civil, penal, litigious-administrative, labour and other cases established by law, fall within the exclusive competence of the Courts of Justice and Tribunals determined in the Organic Law of the Judiciary, according to their various terms of reference ".

of the Organic Law of Judicial Power: "The Government may not dismiss, transfer from office or pension off Judges and Magistrates, except in the cases and in the manner set forth in the Constitution of the Monarchy and the Laws". Legal aid for those lacking economic means is laid down in Fundamental Principle IX of those sanctioned by Law of 17th May, 1958. Similarly, Article 2 of the Organic Law of Judicial Power, of 15th September, 1870, establishes that: "The power of applying the Laws in civil and criminal cases, judgment and the execution of judgment, fall within the exclusive province of the Judges and Tribunals". As regards administrative cases, Article 1 of the Law regulating LitigiousAdministrative Jurisdiction, of 27th December, 1956, states: Litigiousadministrative jurisdiction shall cover claims arising in respect of acts of Public Administration subject to administrative law and with dispositions of a status inferior to that of Law". In labour matters, Article 1 of the text of Article 11 of Law 193/1963, of 28th December, on Bases of Social Security, establishes: "The Jurisdiction of Labour is the only one competent to try, resolve and execute its decisions in individual conflicts in the social sphere of the Law".

55

Article Thirty-two I. Military jurisdiction shall be governed by the laws and dispositions that regulate it exclusively 97. II. Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Concordat with the Holy See 98.

Article Thirty-three The superintendence of the Judiciary is incumbent on the President of the Supreme Court, who shall be appointed from among Spanish jurists of recognized prestige 99.

Article Thirty-four Judges and Magistrates may not be dismissed, suspended, transferred or pensioned off except for the causes and with the guarantees prescribed by law.

Code of Military Justice, approved by Law of 17th July, 1945. The present Concordat, of 27th August, 1953, sanction's in Article 1953, among other jurisdictional norms: "The State recognizes and respects the exclusive competence of the Tribunals of the Church for those offences that only violate ecclesiastical Law". °5 Article 2 of Law of 20th December, 1952, on the Superintendence of Tribunals, stipulates: "The services of the Central Office of Superintendence of Tribunals, shall be performed under the authority and direction of the President of the Supreme Court, who is responsible for the superintendence and surveillance of the administration of justice in all the Tribunals and Courts of the Nation under ordinary jurisdiction". This precept reiterates the provisions of Article 11 of the Law of 17th July, 1945. As for the nomination of the President of the Supreme Court, Article 6 of the Law of 17th July, 1945, establishes that "he shall be nominated by Decree approved by the Council of Ministers, at the proposal of the Council of Justice, from among those jurists who in the performance of their duty in the Magistrature or in the AttorneyGeneral's Office, or as Lawyers or University Professors, enjoy the highest prestige with accredited competence".

56

Article Thirty-five The Office of the Attorney-General, the organ of communication between the Government and the Courts, has the mission of promoting the action of the Judiciary in defence of the public interests protected by law, and to procure before the Courts and Tribunals the maintenance of juridical order and the satisfaction of social interest 1°°. II. The functions entrusted to the Office of the AttorneyGeneral shall be exercised through its organs, in keeping with the principles of unity and hierarchical dependence. I.

Article Thirty-six Public, as well as private, authorities and organs, are obliged to give the Courts and Tribunals the help necessary for the exercise of the jurisdictional function m.

'°° repetition in substance of the norm sanctioned in Article 763 of the Organic Law of Judicial Power: "The Office of the Attorney-General shall promote the action of justice when it concerns public interest and it shall have the representation of the Government in its relations with the Judicial Power", Couched in similar terms is the precept contained in Article 1 of the Statute of the Office of the Attorney-General, approved by Royal Decree of 21st June, 1926. The public servant who, having been requested by the competent authority, fails to offer due co-operation for the administration of justice incurs the penalties outlined in Article 371 of the Penal Code. Article 570, sub-paragraph 7, of said Code typifies as an offence against public order the failure to give the authorities the help requested in the case of an offence.

57

TITLE VI THE ARMED FORCES Article Thirty-seven The Armed Forces of the Nation, consisting of the Army, the Navy and Air Force, and the Forces of Public Order, guarantee the unity and independence of the country, the integrity of her territory, national security and the defence of the institutional system 102.

Article Thirty-eight A National Defence Junta, composed of the President of the Government, the Ministers of the Military Departments, the Chief of the Supreme Staff and the Chiefs-of-Staff of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, shall propose to the Government the general lines to be taken in respect of security and national defence. This National Defence

The Armed Forces of the Nation constitute a single Army, defined in Article 2 of its constitutive Law of 29th November, 1878, as an institution whose function is "to maintain the independence of the country and defend her from her enemies at home and abroad". Article 1 of Law of 19th July, 1889, stipulates that: "The Army is a national institution governed by special laws and dispositions, whose prime purpose is to maintain the independence and integrity of the country and the power of the Constitution and the laws". According to Article 4 of the Law of Public Order, of 30th July, 1959: "For the conservation and restoration of public order, the Home Office exercises the supreme command of the Security Forces of the State, composed of the General Police Corps, the Armed and Traffic Police, the Civil Guard Corps and all other units of security and vigilance or militia of a national, regional, provincial or municipal character, and auxiliary forces. In case of need, it may solicit, through the appropriate channels, the co-operation of military units...".

58

Junta may include such Ministers or high-ranking officials, whose . presence may be advisable because of the nature of the problems under consideration'''.

Article Thirty-nine
A Supreme Staff, dependent on the President of the Government, shall be the technical organ of National Defence, with the mission of co-ordinating the action of the Staffs of the three branches of the Armed Forces.

TITLE VII THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE

Article Forty
I. The Administration, consisting of hierarchically arranged organs, assumes the implementation of the ends of the State for the prompt and efficacious satisfaction of the general interest 104. II. The higher organs of the Administration, their respective competence and the bases for the duties of their functionaries shall be determined by law'''.

""` The Junta was created by Art. 5 of Law of 8th August, 1939.
"4 This declaration appears in Article 1 of the LRJA (Law on Juridical Procedure of the Administration of the State, revised text of 26th July, 1957. "5 According to Article 2, 1, of the LRJA (Law on Juridical Procedure of the Administration of the State), they are: the Head of State, the Council of Ministers, the Delegated Commissions, the President of the Government and the Ministers. Their competence and duties are regulated by the LRJA itself, Title II, Chapter I, covering the Council of Ministers and the Delegated Com-

59

Ill. The Administration shall be advised by the consultative organs established by law 1°6. IV. The Council of State is the supreme consultative body of the Administration, and its competence and functions shall be determined by law '". V. The National Economic Council is the consultative, advisory and technical organ in matters of importance that affect the national economy 108.

Article Forty-one I. The Administration may not issue dispositions contrary to the laws, nor regulate, save by the express authorization of a law, those matters which come under the exclusive competen-e of the Cortes. II. Any administrative dispositions infringing the rules set forth in the preceding paragraph shall be null and void 1°9.

mission of )1e Government; Title II, Chapter II, covering those of the President of the Government and the Ministers. Title II of the present Organic La y outlines the duties and prerogatives of the Head of State. Similarly, Article 13 lists those of the President of the Government. The Law ot 20th July, 1963 approved the bases for such duties, Decree 315/1964 of 7th February having been issued for their application. According Jo sub-paragraph j), Article 10 of the Law of the Cortes, they fall under the competence of the Plenary Session. On juridical matters, advice to the Central Administration is given by the Advisory Section of the Litigation Department. The Provincial Advisory Service is rendered by the State Counsel (Organic Regulation, revised text of 25th April, 1958). Each Department has a Council to deal with special cases. 1" Its Organic Law is dated 25th November, 1944, and) its Regulation, It was created by Law of 4th June, 1940, which specifies its functions. 209 A reproduction of Article 28 of the LRJA of the State. 13th April, 1945.

60

Article Forty-two I. The resolutions and agreements passed by the Administration shall be done in accordance with the norms regulating administrative procedure "°. II. Against the acts and resolutions that finalize administrative procedure, those actions and appeals may be brought before the competent authority as the law al lows "1. III. The responsibility of the Administration, its authorities, functionaires and agents may be demanded for the reasons and in the manner determined by law 12. Article Forty-three All public authorities and functionaries owe allegiance to the Principles of the National Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom and shall take, prior to assuming office, the appropriate oath'''.
11° Reproduces article 31 of the LRJA of the State. The norms governing Administrative procedure are expressed in the Law or 17th July, 1958, revised by Law 164/1963, of 2nd December. in According to Article 36 of the LRJA of the State, the resolutions of the following organs and authorites finalize administrative procedure: 1. The Council of Ministers and the Delegated Commissions of the Government, in all cases. 2. The Ministers, save when an appeal is in process or when a special Law grants an appeal before another of the organs listed in Article 2 of this Law. 3. The lower authorities in cases resolved by a Ministerial delegation or other organ whose resolutions may terminate administrative procedure . 4. The Under-Secretaries and General Directors on questions of personnel. 5. Any authority established by a legal or regulative disposition.
/12

This question is regulated by Title IV of the LRJA of 'the State,

which introduces the concept of the "objective fault", as it concedes the right of indemnity for "the damage suffered by private individuals to their property or rights", as a consequence of the normal or abnormal functioning of the Public Services. 12 It is the first duty that Article 76 of the Civil Service Law imposes on public servants. Law 6/1961, of 19 April, imposes this obligation. Besides, the appointment

61

Article Forty-four The Court of Exchequer of the Kingdom is responsible, with complete independence, for the auditing and verification of the accounts relevant to action taken in the exercise of Budgetary and Fiscal Laws, as well as the accounts of all official organs receiving aid or subsidies out of the General Budget of the State and of its autonomous bodies, and for the execution of the other functions stipulated in its organic Law "4.

TITLE VII LOCAL ADMINISTRATION Article Forty-five The Municipalities are natural entities and constitute the basic structures of the national community, being grouped territorially in provinces 15.
I.

of career civil servants has as a requisite, according to Article 36 of the Civil Service Law (complete text): "... c) The swearing of allegiance
to the Fundamental Principles of the National Movement and other

Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom". The Administrative and Accounting Law, of 1st July, 1911, defines in Article 33 (according to the text approved by the Law of 18th December, 1950) the General Budget of the State as "the ciphered expression of the obligations which the Treasury must meet as the maximum in a year, in respect of the services that must be maintained therein, and the estimate of the resources or means that are considered realizable to cover such services". They shall be drawn up at six-monthly intervals to cover two yearly periods... "and shall be drawn up and presented to the Cortes before 1st July of the applicable year..." (Art. 34). '5 This precept corresponds to Article 1 of the Law of Local Administration, of 24th June, 1955.

62

II. The Province is a district determined by the grouping of Municipalities, besides being a territorial division of the State Administration. Territorial divisions distinct from the Province may also be established 116

Article Forty-six I. The Municipalities and the Provinces have a juridical status and are fully capable of carrying out their particular functions as established by law, without prejudice to their co-operative functions in the service of the State 117. II. The municipal and provincial Corporations, the representative and administrative organs of the Municipality and the Province, respectively, shall be elected by vote through the representative channels specified in Article ten of the Fuero de los Espalioles "8.

Article Forty-seven The State promotes the development of municipal and provincial life, protects and favours the patrimony of the local Corporations ,and ensures the economic means necessary for the fulfilment of their ends.

Article Forty-eight The system of local Administration and of its Corporations, in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles 110 This corresponds to Article 2 of the Law of Local Administration,
although it admits the possibility of creating infra-provincial or supraprovincial territorial divisions. These provisions are regulated by the Law of Local Administration. Regulated by the Regulation on the Organization, Functioning and Juridical System of the Local Corporations, of 17th May, 1952.

63

and the guarantees demanded by the common good in this respect, shall be determined by law.

TITLE IX RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SUPREME ORGANS OF THE STATE Article Forty-nine The Spanish Cortes shall be immediately informed of the appointment of a new Government and of the replacement of any of its members'''.

Article Fifty Apart from its participation in legislative affairs, the Cortes has the following duties in relation to the Head of State: a) receiving from the Head of State and from the heir to the Crown, upon the latter's reaching the age of thirty, an oath of allegiance to the Principles of the Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom 120. resolving, in accordance with the Law of Succession, b) all questions that may arise in respect of the succession in the Headship of State 121

"" This was introduced by the present Law, no provision having formerly

been made in this respect. The oath of allegiance to the Principles of the Movement and other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom was imposed by Article 9 of the Law of Succession in the Headship of the State, as a necessary requisite for the exercise of such Headship. The new Law introduces the requirement that the heir to the throne must take an oath upon reaching the age of thirty. See Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Law of Succession.

64

c) authorizing the Head of State to carry' ou; those acts which, by Fundamental Law, require the intervention of the Cortes "2. executing the other functions entrusted to them by d) the Fundamental Laws.

Article Fifty-one The Government may submit to the sanction of the Head of State dispositions with the force of law, with the express authorization of the Cortes 123.

Article Fifty-two Except in the case covered by the preceding article and those appearing in sub-paragraph d) of Article Ten of this Law, and in Article 13 of the Law of the Cortes, the Government may not issue dispositions which, according to Articles Ten and Twelve of the Law of the Cortes, must take the form of laws 124.
See Article 9 of the Organic Law. This question was already regulated in Article 10, sub-paragraph 4, of the Law on Juridical Procedure of the Administration of the State, which required, over and above the express authorization of the Cortes, the prior approval of the Council of State in plenary session. 124 Article 10 of the Law of the Cortes invests the Cortes with the competence to examine in full the acts or laws related to the major questions of the State, such as budgets, general economic management, the bases of Penal and Civil law, etc. Article 12 of the same Law attributes to the Commissions of the Cortes all the dispositions not included in Article 10, which must take the form of laws, either because they shall be so established in the future, or because they shall be so styled by a commission, created for the purpose by this article. The Government may not issue dispositions on these matters except in the following cases: a) when they have the express authorization of the Cortes (Art. 51 of

65

Article Fifty-three The President of the Government and the Ministers shall inform the Cortes of the activities of the Government and of its respective Departments and, if necessary, must answer all requests, questions and summonses made according to regulations 125.

Article Fifty-four I. The Government is responsible for drawing up the draft Law (Bill) on the General Budget of the State, and the Cortes must approve, amend or reject it. If the Budget Law is not approved before the first day of the following fiscal year, the budget of the previous year shall be considered to be automatically prorogued until the new budget is approved 126. II. Once the General Budget of the State has been approved, only the Government may present Bills requiring an increase in public expenditure or a decrease in revenue, and any proposed law, or amendments to a Bill or proposed law involving an increase in expenditure or a decrease in revenue, shall require the approval of the

the Organic Law and Art. 10, 4, of the Law of Juridical Procedure); b) when external security, the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory or the institutional system of the Kingdom are in grave and imminent danger (Art. 10, d), of the Organic Law); c) in case , of war or emergency, through a Decree-Law (Art. 13 of the Law of the Cortes and Art. 10, sub-para. 3, of the Law of Juridical Procedure). 125 The summonses, requests and questions are regulated in Articles 71 foil. of the Regulations of the Spanish Cortes, approved by Law of 26th December, 1957. This text is in accordance with Article 60 of the Regulations of the
Cortes.

66

Government before they are put through the normal channels 127. Ill. The Government shall submit to the Cortes, for their approval, the General Accounts of the State, once they have been audited and verified by the Court of Exchequer of the Kingdom.

Article Fifty-five The Court of Exchequer of the Kingdom, in the exercise of its function as Controller, must give the Government and the Cortes, in the form of memoranda and reports, its opinion on the manner in which the Budget Laws and other fiscal laws have been executed, in accordance with the provisions of the Law in this• respect, and on those cases which, by virtue of their exceptional importance, it may consider it necessary to exercise this faculty 128.

Article Fifty-six Only the Head of State may seek the advice of the Council of the Realm 179.

Article Fifty-seven It is the duty of the Head of State to settle, in accordance with the laws, any questions of competence between the Administration and the Judges of ordinary and special Courts, and those arising between the Court of Exchequer

127 In accordance with Art. 59 of the Regulations of the Cortes. 1 ' See Article 44 of the present Law. 129 This precept was formerly stated in Article 17 of the Regulations of the Council of the Realm, approved by Decree of 30th December, 1948.

67

and the Administration, or between the Court of Exchequer and the other ordinary and special Courts of justice 130.

Article Fifty-eight I. The Presidents of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Council of State, the Court of Exchequer of the Kingdom, and the National Economic Council shall be appointed by the Head of State from among three candidates proposed by the Council of the Realm 131.
The Law regulating jurisdictional conflicts is dated 17th July, 1948. in Formerly, these appointments fell under the exclusive competence of the Head of State: 1. The President of the Supreme Court was nominated by Decree, approved by the Council of Ministers, at the proposal of the Council of Justice, from among those jurists who in the performance of their duties in the Magistrature, or in the Attorney General's Office, or as Lawyers or Professors, enjoyed the highest prestige with accredited competence (Art. 6 of Law of 17th July, 1945, which reorganized the Supreme Court). 2. The President of the Council of State was nominated, in accordance with Article 5 of the Organic Law of said Council, by the Head of State, from among persons who were or had been one of the following: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. President of the Cortes. Minister. President of the Council of State. President of the Supreme Court. Captain-General of the Army or Navy. President of the Suprem. Council of War and Marine, of the High Court of Military Justice. 7. High Commissioner of Spain in Morocco. 8. Permanent Counsellor of State, with five years of service as such. 3. Article 27 of the Law of the Court of Exchequer, of 3rd December, 1953, stipulated that the nomination of the President rested with the Head of State, without any more limitations. 4. Article 2 of Law of 4th June, 1940, regulating the National Economic Council, stated that the President of the Council would be nominated directly by the Head of State.

08

II. Their term of office shall be for six years, and their posts shall be subject to the restrictions and incompatibilities imposed by law. III. They shall retire: a) upon the expiry of their term of office; b; at their own request, once their resignation has been accepted by the Head of State, having been considered by the Council of the Realm; c) at the decision of the Head of State, in agreement with the Council of the Realm; d) at the proposal of the Council of the Realm, for incapacity recognized by two-thirds of its Members.

TITLE X THE APPEAL OF CONTRAFUERO'
132

Article Fifty-nine
I. Contrafuero is any legislative act or general disposition of the Government that may attack the Principles of the

1"

Under the present title is established, in keeping with traditional terminology, the appeal of contrafuero before the Head of State, with the same meaning as the appeal of unconstitutionality of the Laws in comparative Law. 1. Object of appeal: Any legislative act or general disposition of the Government that infringes the Principles of the National Movement or the other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. 2. Who may promote the appeal:

— The National Council. — The Standing Committee of the Cortes. 3. Organ before which appeal may be placed: The Council of the Realm, presided for this purpose by the President

69

National Movement or the other Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. II. As a guarantee of the principles and norms infringed by contrafuero, the right of appeal before the Head of State has been established.

Article Sixty
The appeal of contrafuero may be lodged by: a) the National Council, in all cases, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of its Members; b) the Standing Committee of the Cortes for Government dispositions of a general nature, by resolution adopted by a two-thirds majority.

Article Sixty-one
I. The appeal of contrafuero must be placed before the Council of the Realm within two months of the publication in the "Boletin Oficial del Estado" (Official Gazette of the State) of the law or disposition of a general nature motivating the appeal. II. The President of the Council of the Realm shall immediately notify the Head of State of the presentation of the appeal of contrafuero, and shall bring it to the attention of the Standing Committee of the Cortes or of the

of the Supreme Court of Justice. This Council acts in such cases as a Court of Constitutional Guarantees.
4. Aspects of Procedure.

Although the present title covers some points of procedure, a special Law shall establish all the aspects of procedure arising out of the present appeal of contrafuero. See Organic Law of the Movement and of its National Council, of 26th June, 1967.

70

President of the Government, as the case may 'be, so that, if necessary, they may appoint a representative to defend the validity of the law or disposition (of a general nature) concerned before the Council of the Realm. III. The Council of the Realm, upon deciding that the motives are well-founded, may propose to the Head of State the suspension, during the process of appeal, of the law or disposition (of a general nature) concerned or, if applicable, of the precept or precepts of such a law or disposition that may be affected by the appeal.

Article Sixty-two I. The Council of the Realm shall seek a ruling on the question posed by the appeal of contrafuero from a Committee of Inquiry presided by the President of a Division of the Supreme Court of Justice and composed of: one Member of the National Council, one Permanent Counsellor of State, one Magistrate of the Supreme Court of Justice and one Deputy of the Cortes, appointed by the Standing Committee of the respective institutions and, in the case of the Supreme Court, by its Government Division. Said ruling shall be brought to the Council of the Realm, with details of the individual votes, if any. II. The Council of the Realm, presided for this purpose by the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall propose to the Head of State the resolution taken.

Article Sixty-three Should the Standing Committee of the Cortes recognize an infringement of the Principles of the Movement, or of the other Fundamental Laws, in a Bill or proposed law on which a ruling has been given by the appropriate 71

Committee of the Cortes, it shall express its opinion, in detail and in writing, within eight days following the publication of the ruling in the "Boletin Oficial", to the President of the Cortes, who shall pass it on to the Committee responsible for the ruling, so that it may re-examine the Bill or proposed law in question. Meanwhile, its inclusion on the agenda of the Assembly shall be suspended or, if necessary, it shall be removed. Article Sixty-four The resolution that annuls, as a contrafuero, the legislative act or disposition (of a general nature) of the Government, the object of the appeal, shall require the immediate publication in the "Boletin Oficial del Estado" of the nullity granted, with the latitude proper to the case defined. Article Sixty-five I. The Head of State, before submitting to referendum a Bill or proposed law drawn up by the Cortes, shall ask the National Council to declare, within fifteen days, whether in its judgment there exists any motive that might bring about an appeal of contrafuero. II. If the National Council thinks that such a motive exists, it shall proceed to act in the manner outlined in Article sixty-one. Otherwise, or in the case of an appeal being rejected, the law may be submitted to referendum, and after its promulgation, it may not be the object of an appeal of contrafuero. Article Sixty-six A special Law shall establish the conditions, the form and the terms of procedure for promoting and substantiating an appeal of contrafuero. 72

TRANSITORY DISPOSITIONS

First
I. When the provisions of the Law of Succession have been fulfilled, the person called to exercise the Headship of State, as King or Regent, shall assume the functions and duties assigned to the Head of State in the present Law. II. The attributions granted to the Head of State by the Laws of 30th January, 1938, and 8th August, 1939, as well as the prerogatives bestowed upon him by Articles Six and Thirteen of the Lew of Succession, shall subsist and remain in force until the eventuality referred to in the preceding paragraph comes to pass. Ili. The National Leadership of the Movement is vested for life in the person of Francisco Franco, Caudillo of Spain. Upon the fulfilment of the provisions of the succession, it shall pass to the Head of State and, by his delegation, to the President of the Government.

Second
Upon the constitution of the next legislative term of the Cortes, there shall come into torce the amendments introduced by the third additional disposition of the present Law ("Boletin Oficial del Estado" No. 9, of 11th January, 1967), in Articles two, six and paragraph 5 of Article seven of the Law of the Cortes, and immediately thereafter the amendments made in the Council of the Realms, according to the new text of Article Fr,ir of the Law of Succession in the Headship of State established in the Fourth Additional Disposition.

Third
With the exceptions made in the preceding transitory disposition, the present Law shall come into force on the day following its promulgation. 73

Fourth Within a period of four months as from the promulgation of the present Law, there shall be published the revised text of the Fundamental Laws, which shall contain the amendments referred to in the additional dispositions of the present Law, after their sanction by the Council of the Realm and their debate by the Council of Ministers. Fifth The Government, within as brief a period as possible, shall present to the Cortes the Bills, and will issue the dispositions, leading to the execution of the present Law.

FINAL DISPOSITIONS First As of the date this Law comes into force, all dispositions contrary to its precepts shall be derogated. Second The present Law is a Fundamental Law, as defined in Article Ten of the Law of Succession in the headship of State '33.
The Fundamental Las re those essential principles of political organization compiled in one or several legislative volumes, which are given a higher formal status than that of ordinary laws. According to Article 10 of the Law of Succession in the Headship of State, of 26th July, 1947, the Fundamental Laws are: the Fuero de los Espanoles (Statute Law of the Spanish People, of 17th July, 1945), the Labour Law (of 9th March, 1938), the Constitutive Law of the Spanish Cortes (of .7th July, 1942, reformed by that of 9th March, 1946), the present Law of Succession, the Law of the National Referendum (of 22nd October, 1945) and any other which may be promulgated in the future in this category. Their derogation or amendment shall require, besides the approval of the Cortes, a National Referendum.

74

V

CONSTITUTIVE LAW OF THE CORTES of 17th July, 1942, amended by the Organic Law of the State of. 10th January, 1967

The creation of a juridical system, the organization of the administrative activities of the. State, the adjustment of the new order to an institutional system with clarity and precision, require a process of elaboration from which it is unwise to omit representatives of the constitutive elements of the national community, in order to achieve a design of the highest quality and a firm foundation in the country. The contrast of opinions — within the unity of the system — the airing of aspirations, well-grounded and constructive criticism, and the intervention of legislative technique should contribute to vitality, justice and the perfection of the positive ,law of the Revolution and of the new Economy of the Spanish people. Hazards so abnormal that it would be idle to explain them have delayed the achievement of this goal. But, the phase of the National Movement when it was not feasible to attempt to put it into effect having passed, the time has come to establish an organ to accomplish this grand design. -Continuing in the Headship of State the supreme power for dictating juridical norms of a general nature, in the terms of the Laws of 30th January, 1938, and 8th August, 1939, the organ created will signify, as well as being an effective instrument of collaboration in that function, a principle of self-limitation for a more systematic institution of authority. On the lines of the National Movement, the Cortes, now in the process of formation, will signify the revival of a 77

glorious Spanish tradition, both in its designation and in its composition and attributions. The amendments introduced by the Organic Law of the State and by its additional dispositions serve to perfect and accentuate the representative character of the political system, which is the basic principle of the public institutions. So far as the Cortes is concerned, they have certain fundamental aims: introducing a new group of Deputies to represent the family, elected by the Heads of Families and married women, in keeping with the principle of equal political rights for women; extending representation to other Societies, Corporations and Associations, at the same time, reducing drastically the number of Deputies therein and, in general, securing a more authentic representation and increasing to a considerable degree the proportion of elected Deputies in relation to those who hold that title by reason of office. The same method is followed in the election, by the Cortes in plenary session and in each legislative term, of the two Vice-Presidents and the four Secretaries. IN VIRTUE OF WHICH, I RESOLVE: Article One The Cortes are the highest organ of participation by the Spanish people in the affairs of the State. The principal function of the Cortes is the elaboration and approval of Laws, without prejudice to the sanction reposing in the Head of State 134 "4
Some precepts of the Organic Law of the State refer to the relations

of the Head of State with the Cortes: Art. 7, on convocation and prorogue; Art. 9 on agreement or authorization to carry out specific acts; Art. 10, stipulating that the Head of State shall be assisted by the Council of the Realm to propose to the Cortes the acts set forth in the preceding article, to return to the Cortes a law drawn up by the Cortes,

78

Article Two 135 I. The Cortes are composed of Deputies in the following categories:
or to prorogue a legislative term for grave reasons. Similarly, it requires that the Cortes should take note of the measures adopted in the eventualities indicated in Article 10, a) and Article 11 of the Organic Law of the State. The attributions of the Cortes in relation to other high organs of the State are listed in Articles 49-53 and 55. Art. 41 of the Organic Law of the State is a restatement of Art. 26 of the Law on Juridical Procedure of the Administration of th State, of 26th July, 1957, which prohibits the Administration from regulating, save with the express authorization of the Law, matters falling within the exclusive competence of the Cortes. The intervention of the Cortes in the appeal of contrafuero is described in Arts. 59-63 of the Organic Law of the State. The Cortes have been converted into the single legislative organ of the nation, this body having been assigned the task of "elaborating and approving the laws". Formerly, the Cortes only "prepared and elaborated" the laws. The representation of the Trade Union Organization in the Cortes is regulated by Decree of 24th February, 1961, amended by Decrees of 7th March and 23rd April, 1964. On the replacement of Deputies of the Cortes representing the Municipalities, see Decrees of 18th February, 1955, and 22nd February, 1964. For information on Deputies of the Cortes representing the Provincial Deputations and Insular Districts, see Decrees of 4th March, 1955, and 21st April, 1964. The changes made in the composition of the Cortes are substantial: 1. Municipal representation may be effected through any of their Councillors, while the former system limited it to Mayors appointed by the Government. 2. Direct family representation has been introduced, formerly non-existent, through the election of 104 Deputies (two to a province) by the heads of families and married women. See Law on Family Representation in the Cortes, of 26th June, 1967. 3. 4. The number of Deputies freely appointed by the Head of State has A declaration has been made that all Deputies have freedom of been reduced from 50 to 25. action in the service of the nation and the common good, and are not bound by any imperative mandate.

79

a) Members 'of the Government; b) , Members of the National Council; c) the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, the President of the Council of State, the President of the• Supreme Council of Military Justice, the President of the Court of Exchequer of the Kingdom and the President of the National Economic Council; d) one hundred and fifty representatives of the Trade Union Organization; e) one representative of the Municipalities of each Province elected by their Town Councils from among their members, and another from each of the Municipalities of more than 300,000 inhabitants, and from the Municipalities of Ceuta and Melilla, elected by the respective Town Councils from among their members; one representative for each Provincial Deputation and the Canary Island District, elected by the respective Corporations from among their members, and the representatives of the local Corporations of territories not constituted in provinces, elected in a similar Manner; f) two Family representatives for each Province, elected by those appearing on the electoral rolls as heads of families and married women, in the manner established by law; g) the Rectors of Universities; h) the President of the Spanish Institute and two representatives elected from among the members of the Royal Academies forming the Institute; the President of the Council for Advanced Scientific Research and two representatives of this Council elected by its members. i) the President of the Institute of Civil Engineers and one representative of the Associations of Engineers forming the Institute; two representatives of the Colleges of Lawyers; two representatives of the Medical Colleges; one representative of each of the following Colleges; College of Stock-Exchange Agents, College of Architects, College 80

of Economists, College of Pharmacists, College of Licentiates and Doctors of Science and Letters, College of Licentiates and Doctors of Chemical and Physico-Chemical Sciences, College of Notaries, College of Court Attorneys, College of Property Recorders, College of Veterinary Surgeons, and other professional Colleges of higher academic status which may be recognized for this purpose in the future and which shall be elected by the respective Official Colleges; three representatives of the Official Chambers of Commerce, one representative of the Chambers of Urban Property; one representative of the Tenant Associations, elected by their Boards or representative organs; all those elected under the provisions of this sub-paragraph must be members of the respective Colleges, Corporations or Associations electing them; (The composition and distribution of the Deputyships covered in this sub-paragraph may be altered by law, provided the total number does not exceed thirty.) j) those persons who by virtue of their ecclesiastical, military or administrative status, or their service to the country, may be appointed by the Head of State, after approval by the Council of the Realm, up to a number not exceeding twenty-five. II. All the Deputies of the Cortes represent the Spanish people, must serve the nation and the common good, and must not be bound by any imperative mandate.

Article Three 136

To be a Deputy of the Cortes, one must be: 1. a Spaniard and must have attained one's majority;

The rights and duties of Deputies are outlined in Articles 5-9 of the Regulations 'of the Cortes, dated 26th December, 1957. See Law on Family Representation in the Cortes, of 26th June, 1967.

81

2. free of political incapacity and enjoy the full use of one's civil rights.

Article Four

The Deputies of the Cortes shall verify before the President of the Cortes the election, designation or office giving them the right to such an investiture. The President of the Cortes shall witness the swearing of their oath, shall give possession of and issue the corresponding titles.

Article Five 137

The Deputies of the Cortes may not be arrested without the previous authorization of the President of the Cortes, except in cases of f/agrante delicto. In such cases, the President of the Cortes shall be notified of the arrest.

Article Six

Deputies of the Cortes who hold membership by reason of their tenure of office shall cease to be Deputies upon their retirement from said office. Those appointed by the Head of State shall cease to be Deputies upon the revocation of their appointment by the Head of State. The other Deputies shall serve a term of four years, and may be re-elected; but, if during this term of four years, a Deputation, Town Council or Corporation representative should cease to be a member of the body he represents, he shall also cease to be a Deputy of the Cortes.

See Article 7 of Regulations of the Cortes of 26th December, 1957.

82

Article Seven 138
I. The President of the Cortes shall be appointed by the Head of State from among three Deputies of the Cortes proposed to him by the Council of the Realm within the maximum period of ten days after the vacancy occurs. His nomination shall be approved by the President of the Council of the Realm. II. His term of office shall be for six years, during which period he shall retain his status as Deputy of the Cortes. The office of President of the Cortes shall be subject to the restrictions and incompatibilities prescribed by law. III. The President of the Cortes shall retire from office: a) upon the expiry of his term of office; b) at his own request, once his resignation has been accepted by the Head of State, having been considered by the Council of the Realm in a session not attended by the President of the Cortes; c) at the decision of the Head of State, in agreement with the Council of the Realm in a session not attended by the President of the Cortes; d) for incapacity recognized by two-thirds of the Deputies of the Cortes, presided by the first Vice-President or the second Vice-President, after a detailed presentation of the case by the Standing Committee, presided over in a similar manner, or by the Government. IV. When the presidency of the Cortes falls vacant, this post shall be assumed by the first Vice-President or the second Vice-President, until a new President is appointed within a period of ten days. V. The two Vice-Presidents and the four Secretaries of

The convocation, constitution and functioning of the Plenary Assembly are regulated in Article 61 foll. of the Regulations of the Cortes.,

83

the Cortes shall be elected, at each legislative term from among the Deputies, by the Cortes in plenary session.

Article Eight
The Cortes shall function in plenary session and in Committees. The Committees are established and nominated by the President of the Cortes, at the proposal of the Standing Committee and in agreement with the Government. The President, in agreement with the Government, draws up the agenda for both the plenary session and the Committees.

Article Nine
The Cortes shall assemble in plenary session for the examination of the laws requiring such treatment, and whenever they are convoked by the President, in agreement with the Government.

Article Ten 139
The Cortes shall examine, in plenary session, the acts or laws dealing with the following matters: a) the ordinary and extraordinary budgets of the State; b) large-scale operations of an economic or financial nature; c) the establishment or reform of the tax system; banking and monetary affairs; d) e) the economic intervention of the Trade Unions and, whatever legislative measures may affect the Economy of the nation to an important degree;

The convocation, constitution and functioning of the Plenary Session are regulated in Articles 61 foil. of the Regulations of the Cortes.

84

f) basic law regulating the acquisition and loss of Spanish nationality and the duties, and rights of the Spanish people; g) the politico-juridical organization of the institutions of the State; h) the structure of local administration; 1) the structures of Civil, Mercantile, Social and Penal Law and litigation; j) the structures of judicial Organization and Public Administration; k) the structures of agrarian, mercantile and industrial organization; I) national educational schemes; m) any other laws that the Government, of its own accord or at the proposal of a Committee, may decide to submit to the Cortes in plenary session; similarly, the Government may submit to the Cortes in plenary session questions or resolutions that have no legal connotations.
Article Eleven

140

The Bills to be submitted to the Plenary Session of the Cortes shall first be passed to the Committees concerned for a report and proposal thereon.
Article Twelve 141

I. All the dispositions not covered in Article Ten and which must take the form of laws fall within the competence of the Committees of the Cortes, whether This is established in a later law or whether they are declared as such by a Committee composed -of the President of the Cortes, a Minister appointed by the Go'
The procedure to be followed on Bills is described in Articles 34-52

of the kegulations of the Cortes. 141 The composition, attributions and functioning of the Committees of the Cortes are described in Articles 19-33 of the Regulations of the Cortes.

85

vernment, a Member of the Standing Committee of the National Council, a Deputy of the Cortes who is a qualified Lawyer, the President of the Council of State and the President of the Supreme Court of Justice. This Committee shall issue a ruling at the request of the Government or of the Standing Committee of the Cortes. Article Thirteen For reasons or urgency, the Government may propose to the Head of State the sanctioning of decree-laws to regulate the matters mentioned in Articles Ten and Twelve. The urgency of the case shall be recognized by the Head of State, having been brought to the attention of the Committee referred to in the preceding article, and this Committee may so advise the Standing Committee if it observes any aspect of contrafuero. The promulgation of a decree-law shall be brought to the notice of the Cortes. Article Fourteen I. The ratification of international treaties or agreements that affect the full sovereignty or the territorial integrity of Spain shall be the object of a law approved by the Cortes in full session. II. The Cortes in Plenary Session or in Committee, as the case may be, shall be consulted for the ratification of other treaties affecting matters whose regulation falls within their competence, in accordance with Articles Ten and Twelve. Article Fifteen 142 I. Besides the examination and presentation of Government Bills to the Plenary Session, the legislative Corn12
The procedure on proposed laws is described in Articles 53-57 of

the Regulations of the Cortes.

86

mittees may submit proposed laws to the President of the Cortes, who is responsible for including them in the agenda, in agreement with the Government. II. The legislative Committees may receive from the President of the Codes other assignments, such as carrying out studies, obtaining information and formulating petitions or proposals. For this purpose, they may form special Committees distinct from the legislative Committees.

Article Sixteen

143

The President of the Cortes shall submit to the Head of State, for his sanction, the laws approved by the Cortes, which should be promulgated within a month of their receipt by the Head of State.

Article Seventeen

144

The Head of State, through an explanatory message and with a prior favourable ruling by the Council of the Realm, may return a law to the Cortes for renewed deliberation.

ADDITIONAL DISPOSITIONS The Cortes, in agreement with the Government, shall draft their own regulations.
Us Unlike the former system, there is now a time limit for the sanctioning and promulgation of Laws approved by the Cortes by the Head of State. 1" The faculties of the Head of State have been limited in respect of returning to the Cortes a Law for re-examination, by the reqUirement, now being introduced, that he should • have "a prior favourable ruling by the Council of the Realm".

87

VI

LAW OF SUCCESSION IN THE HEADSHIP OF STATE of 26th July, 1947, amended by the Organic Law of the State of 10th January, 1967

WHEREAS the Spanish Cortes, as the highest organ of participation by the people in the affairs of State, have drawn up the Fundamental Law declaring the constitution of the Kingdom, have created the Council of the Realm and determined the norms governing the Succession in the Headship of State, whose text, having been submitted to the referendum of the nation, has been accepted by eighty-two per cent of the electorate, representing ninetythree per cent of voters. AND WHEREAS the Organic Law of the State amends certain articles of said Fundamental Law, in respect of the ccmposition of the Council of the Realm, determining that ten of its Members shall be elected as against the former number of four; and introduces other amendments to clarify certain points of the process of succession the purpose of avoiding any risks. Pursuant to the approval of the Cortes and with the true and direct expression of the will of the nation, I RESOLVE:

Article One

145

Spain, as a political unit, is a Catholic, social and representative State which, in keeping with her tradition, declares herself constituted into a Kingdom.
The constitution of Spain as a Catholic State is described in Article 6 of the Fuero de los Espaitoles and in the Concordat with the Holy See of 27th August, 1953. For the manifestations of the Social State, see Labour Law. For information on the Representative State, see Art. 10 of the Fuero

91

Article Two 146 The Head of State is the Caudillo of Spain and of the Crusade, Generalisimo of the Armed Forces, don Francisco Franco Bahamonde.

Article Three

147

If the Headship of State should fall vacant, its powers shall be assumed by a Regency Council, composed of the President of the Cortes, the highest-ranking Prelate serving as Counsellor of the Realm for the longest period, and the Captain-General, or in his absence, the LieutenantGeneral, in active service and with the most seniority, of the Army, Navy or Air Force in this order, or their respective deputies in accordance with the provisions of the following article. The President of this Council shall be the President of the Cortes, and the validity of its resolutions shall require the presence of at least two of

de los Espaholes, the Law of the Cortes, the Trade Union Law, the Law

ors Local Administration, of 24th June, 1955 (Arts. 85-93 and 226-234), and the Organic Law of the State (Arts. 21 and 22). 146 The Law of 30th January, 1938, and that of 8th August, 1939, as well as the second transitory disposition of the Organic Law of the State establish and determine the powers of the Head of State, attributed. to Francisco Franco Bahamonde. See Title II of the Organic Law. 17 The appointment of the President of the Cortes is verified in the manner established in Art. 7 of the Law regulating it; the Prelate of the highest rank and seniority shall be a Deputy of the Cortes, according to Art. 4 of this same Law; the appointment of the Captain-General or the Lieutenant-General is regulated by Decree of 18th July, 1938, and Laws of 11th April, 1941, and 19th April, 1961. The changes made in Art. 3 tend to strengthen the constitution of the Regency Council, allowing the entry of the deputies of the nominees and establishing a quorum for the validity of resolutions.

92

its three members, including, at all times, that of its President or, in his absence, that of the Vice-President of the Council of the Realm.

Article Four 148

I. A Council of the Realm, which shall have precedence over the consultative bodies of the nation, shall assist the Head of State on highly important matters and resolutions falling within his exclusive competence. The President of the Cortes shall serve as President to this Council, which shall consist of the following members: — the Prelate of the highest rank and -seniority among those who are Deputies of the Cortes; — the Captain-General or, in his absence, the LieutenantGeneral, in active service and of the most seniority of the Army, Navy or Air Force in that order; — the Commanding-General of the Supreme Staff or, in

See Law of the Cortes. A qualified majority is required in the following cases: — to propose to the Cortes a person or title of King or Regent. Art. 8 of the Law of the Cortes. — to declare the incapacity of the Head of State. Art. 14 of the Law of the Cortes. — to declare the incapacity of the President of the Government end of the Presidents of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Council of State, the Court of Exchequer of the. Kingdom and the National Economic Council. Arts. 15 and 58 of the Organic Law of the State. The composition and action of the Council of the Realm is strengthened and its elective basis is extended by duplicating the number of councillors from Local Administration and the Trade Union Organization, and introducing two new Councillors for family representation and for the group of National Councillors. In future, 10 of the 17 members of this Council shall be elected.

93

his absence, the most senior of the three General Chiefsof-Staff of the Army, Navy and Air Force; — the President of the Supreme Court of Justice; — the President of the Council of State; -- the President of the Spanish Institute; — two Councillors elected by vote by each of the following groups of Deputies of the Cortes: a) that of the Members of the National Council; b) c) that of the Trade Union Organization; that of Local Administration; and

d) that of family representation; — one Councillor elected by vote by each of the following groups of Deputies of the Cortes: a) b) that of University Rectors; that of Professional Colleges.

II. The office of Councillor shall be bound to the conditions under which election or nomination was made. III. The Head of State shall appoint, at the proposal of the Council of the Realm, from among its members, a VicePresident and the deputies of each of the Members of the Regency Council. IV. In cases where it is impossible for the President to attend, or if the Presidency of the Cortes should be vacant and, in this latter case, until such Presidency is filled, the Vice-President of the Council of the Realm shall deputize for the President. V. The resolutions, rulings and draft resolutions of the Council of the Realm shall be adopted by a majority of votes among the Members present, whose number may not be less than half plus one of the total membership, except when the Fundamental Laws may demand a determined majority. In the event of a tie in the voting, the President shall decide the vote. 94

Article Five

149

The Head of State shall be assisted preceptively by the Council of the Realm in those cases where the present Law or another Fundamental Law establishes this requisite.

Article Six 150 At any moment, the Head of State may propose to the Cortes the person whom he thinks should succeed him, either as King or as Regent, under the conditions laid down by this Law, and similarly, he may submit for the approval of the Cortes the revocation of the person proposed by him, even though this person might have been accepted by the Cortes.

Article Seven When, upon the Headship of State becoming vacant, the person appointed in accordance with the preceding article is called to the succession, the Regency Council shall assume powers irn his name and shall convoke a joint session of the Cortes and the Council of the Realm to witness the swearing of the oath prescribed in the present Law and proclaim him King or Regent.

Article Eight I. Should the Head of State die or be declared incapacitated without having appointed a successor, the Regency
"9 See Organic Law of the State, Law of the Cortes (Art. 7) and Arts. 12 and 13 of this Law. 159 The composition and functioning of the Regency Council are described in Art. 3 of this same Law.

95

Council shall assume all powers, except that of revoking the nominatiön of any one of the members of the Council itself, who shall retain their office in any event, and shall convoke, within three days, the members of the Government and of the Council of the Realm so that they may, in an uninterrupted and secret session; decide, by a two-thirds majority of those present, which shall be considered to be an absolute majority, which person of royal blood, in possession of the qualities required by the present Law, and taking into account the supreme interests of the country, they should propose to the Cortes as King. Should the proposal not be accepted, the Government and the Council of the Realm may formulate, subject to the same procedure, a second proposal in favour of another person of royal blood who also is qualified under the law. II. When, in the opinion of the joint session, there is no one of royal blood with the required qualities, or if their proposals have not been accepted by the Cortes, they shall propose, with the same conditions, as Regent, the person who by his prestige, capacity and possible service to the nation, should hold this position. On presenting this proposal, they may indicate the term and conditions for the duration of the Regency, and the Cortes must decide on each of these points. If the person proposed as Regent is not accepted by the Cortes, the Government and the Council of the Realms must make, subject to the same procedure, new proposals until the approval of the Cortes is obtained. III. In the eventualities discussed in the preceding paragraphs, if the two-thirds majority is not obtained in the first voting, a second vote shall be taken and, if necessary, a third vote. In the third vote, a threefifths majority shall suffice to validate the decision, and this must be equivalent to at least the absolute majority. IV The Cortes should meet in plenary session within a maximum of eight days after each proposal, and the

96

successor, having obtained the favourable vote of the Cortes, in accordance with the provisions of Article Fifteen, shall take the oath required by this Law, in virtue of which, and immediately thereafter, the Regency Council shall transfer its powers to the successor. V. If the provisions established in Article Eleven of this Law are not fulfilled, upon the Headship of State becoming vacant, a successor shall be appointed in accordance with the stipulations of the present Article.

Article Nine
In order to exercise the Headship of State as King or Regent, the candidate must be male and a Spaniard, must have attained the age of thirty, profess the Catholic religion, possess the qualities necessary for the execution of his high mission and swear to uphold the Fundamental Laws, as well as swear allegiance to the Principles governing the National Movement. The same oath must be taken by the successor after reaching the age of thirty years.

Article Ten 1"
The Fundamental Laws of the nation are: the Fuero de los Espatio/es (Statute Law of the Spanish People), the Labour Law, the Constitutive Law of the Cortes, the present Law of Succession, the Law of the National Referendum and any other 'which may be promulgated in the future in this category. Their derogation or amendment shall require, not only the approval of the Cortes, but the referendum of the nation.

731 Articles 10 and 75 of the Organic Law of, the State. 97

Article Eleven
I. Once the Crown has been restored to the King, the regular order of succession shall be that of primogeniture and right of succession, with preference for the anterior line over the posterior; in the same line, the closest degree of kinship over the furthest; in the same degree of kinship, the male over the female, who may not reign, but who may transmit the right to her heirs, and, in the same sex, the older over the younger; all this without prejudice to the exceptions and requirements prescribed in the preceding Articles. II. In the event that the heir to the Crown, according to the order established in the preceding paragraph, has not reached the age of thirty when the throne becomes vacant, his public functions shall be exercised by a Regent appointed in accordance with Article Eight of this Law, until the heir reaches the legal age. III. The same norm shall apply if because of the incapacity of the King, recognized in the manner prescribed in Article Fourteen of the Law, the Cortes should declare the installation of the Regency, the heir not having yet reached the age of thirty years. IV. In the eventualities discussed in the two preceding paragraphs, the Regency shall come to an end as soon as the reason motivating its presence ceases to exist.

Article Twelve
Ail cession of rights before acceding to the throne, abdications when the successor has been appointed, renouncements of any nature and royal marriages, as well as the marriage of the immediate successors, shall be announced by the Council of the Realm and approved by the Cortes of the nation.

98

Article Thirteen The Head of State, upon the advice of the Council of the Realm, may propose to the Cortes that there be excluded from the succession those royal persons lacking the necessary capacity to rule or who, because of their notorious departure from the fundamental principles of the State or because of their acts, deserve to lose the rights of succession established in this Law. Article Fourteen 152 The incapacity of the Head of State, recognized by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Government, shall be communicated in a detailed report to the Council of the Realm. If this Council, by the same majority, should agree on this point, the President of the Council of the Realm shall submit the matter to the Cortes, which, at a session called within the following eight days, shall adopt the ensuing resolution. Article Fifteen I. The validity of the resolutions taken by the Cortes in respect of this Law shall depend on the favourable vote of two-thirds of the Deputies present, which must be equivalent, at least, to the absolute majority of all the Deputies. II. However, in the eventualities discussed in Articles six and eight of the present Law, if the Iwo-thirds majority is not obtained in the first voting, a second and, if necessary, a third vote shall be taken. In the third voting, the resolution shall be validated by a three-fifths majority, which must be equivalent, at least, to the absolute majority.
Arts. 3 and 8 of this Law.

99

VII

LAW OF THE NATIONAL REFERENDUM of 22nd October, 1945

Article Two
The referendum shall be extended to all men and women of the nation over the age of twenty-one years.

Article Three
The Government is authorized to issue the complementary dispositions for the taking of the census and the execution of the present Law.

104

Every Spaniard having been given the opportunity to collaborate in the affairs of the State through the natural agencies of the family, the municipality and the Trade Union, and the basic Laws having been promulgated for bringing new vigour and greater spontaneity to the representative bodies within a system of Christian association, in order to safeguard the nation against the deviation that the political history of peoples has shown, to the effect that in matters of the utmost importance or public interest, the will of the nation could be supplanted by the subjective criterion of its rulers, this Headship of State, making use of the faculties granted by the Laws of 30th January, 1948, and 8th August, 1939, has considered it advisable to institute the direct consultation of the nation by public referendum in all those cases in which, because of the transcendent nature of the laws or the uncertainty of opinion, the Head of State should deem such a consultation appropriate.

IN VIRTUE OF WHICH, I RESOLVE: Article One
When the importance of certain laws warrant it, or if public interest demands it, the Head of State may, for the better service of the nation, submit to referendum the Bills (draft laws) drawn up by the Cortes.

1 NI

Article Two The referendum shall be extended to all men and women of the nation over the age of twenty-one years.

Article Three The Government is authorized to issue the complementary dispositions for the taking of the census and the execution of the present Law.

104

