PRESENT: THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY IN COUNCIL.

WHEREAS

by " The Ceylon (Legislative Council) Order

in Council, 1923,"(2) His Majesty, by and with the advice

of his Privy Council, was pleased to make provision for the constitution of a Legislative Council for the island of Ceylon, with the territories and dependencies thereof; And whereas the said Order in Council was amended by The Ceylon (Legislative Council) Amendment Order in Council, 1924,"(Q) and by " The Ceylon (Legislative Council) Amendment Order in Council, 1928,"(1) and by " The Ceylon (Legislative Council) Amendment Order in Council, 1929,"(5) and by " The Ceylon (Legislative Council) Amendment Order in Council, 1930 -(6) (all the said Orders in Council being hereinafter referred to as " the Orders in Council of 1923 to 1930) 



And whereas in each of the said Orders in Council His Majesty reserved to himself, his heirs and successors, power, with the advice of his or their Privy Council, to revoke, alter, or amend the same as to him or them should seem fit; And whereas a Legislative Council has been duly constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Orders in Council of 1923 to 1930; And whereas it is expedient to revoke the said Orders in Council and to make provision for the constitution of a State Council for the island in lieu of the said Legislative Council, and for the exercise of executive functions by the members thereof; And whereas His Majesty has power, by and with the advice of his Privy Council, to pass laws in and for the island: Now, therefore, it is hereby ordered by His 'Majesty, by and with the advice of his Privy Council, as follows: Preliminary. 1. This Order may be cited as - The Ceylon (State It shall be published in Council) Order in Council, 1931." the Government Gazette, and shall come into operation(') upon a date to be declared by the Governor by Proclamation in the Government Gazette. 2. Nothing in this Order shall extend to the Maldive Islands. 3. The Orders in Council of 1923 to 1930 are hereby revoked, but such revocation shall not prejudice anything lawfully done thereunder, or affect or prevent a prosecution for an offence committed before the commencement of this Order, and notwithstanding such revocation, the Legislative Council now subsisting constituted under the said Orders in Council shall, until it is dissolved, continue to exist and to possess and exercise all the privileges, powers and functions conferred upon it by those Orders, and the Governor shall dissolve the said Council at such time, not later than 6 months after this Order shall come into operation, as he shall think fit. 4.-(1) In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires- British subject - means any person who is a British subject under the provisions of " The British Nationality and Status of Aliens Acts, 1914-1922, " (8) any person who has been naturalised under any enactment of a British
(7)


possession, and any person who is a British protected person, as hereinafter defined. " British protected person" means any person who is a native of the territories of any native Prince or Chief under the suzerainty of His Majesty exercised through the Governor-General of India or through any Governor or other officer subordinate to, the Governor-General of India and is resident in Ceylon. " Member " means a member of the State Council. " Person " or " persons " includes both sexes. " Persons holding public office under the Crown in the island " and cognate expressions shall not include(a) Persons who are not in the permanent employment of the Crown in the island, but shall include persons serving the Crown in the island for a term of years; (b) The Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Deputy Chairman of Committees, and Ministers; (c) Any officer or soldier of a Defence Force formed under " The Defence Force Ordinance, 1910," or under any ordinance amending or repealing that ordinance; (d) Persons in the employment of municipal councils, district councils, the Board of Improvement of Nuwara Eliya, Local Boards, Sanitary Boards, and Boards of Health, Village Committees and Provincial and District Committees constituted under any law of the island relating to local government, education, or the management of roads, canals, or rivers; (e) Crown Proctors; (f) Crown Advocates not being Crown Counsel. " Register " or " register of voters " means the register of voters for any particular electoral district. " The Council " means the State Council constituted under this Order. " The Secretary of State " means one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. (2) In the construction of this Order any reference to the head of any Government department shall be taken to refer to the officer designated by the Governor by notice in the Government Gazette to be the head of that department, and in connexion with the administration of any subject or the exercise of any function with which Government agents are concerned, all the provisions of this Order which apply to heads of departments shall apply to Government agents. (3) In the construction of this Order the provisions of The Interpretation Ordinance, 1901," shall, subject to the express provisions of this Order, and notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in such ordinance, apply as




if this Order were an ordinance of the Legislative Council of the island, or of the State Council as hereby constituted. Constitution of the State Council. 5. Upon the dissolution of the Legislative Council at present subsisting and constituted under the Orders in Council of 1923 to 1930, there shall be substituted in place thereof a State Council constituted as hereinafter provided. 6. There shall be three Secretaries to the Government of the island, namely, a Chief Secretary, a Legal Secretary, and a Financial Secretary, who shall be appointed by the Governor with the approval of the Secretary of State; provided that until the Governor shall appoint a person to be Legal Secretary all the provisions of this Order which refer to the office of Legal Secretary, or to the person for the time being lawfully exercising the functions of that office, shall be deemed to apply to the office of Attorney-General, or to the person for the time being lawfully exercising the functions of that office, as the case may require. 7. The Council shall consist of the following persons:(a) The three persons for the time being lawfully exercising the functions of the respective offices of Chief Secretary, Legal Secretary, and Financial Secretary. Such persons shall be styled " Officers of State," and shall be to all intents and purposes members of the Council having all the rights and privileges of membership save that they shall not vote upon any question before the Council. All references in this Order to the Chief Secretary, Legal Secretary or Financial Secretary shall include the persons for the time being lawfully exercising the functions of those offices respectively. (b) Fifty persons who shall be elected in accordance with the law for the time being in force relating to the election of members of the Council. Such persons are herein referred to as " elected members." (c) Not more than eight persons who shall be appointed in the manner hereinafter provided and are herein referred to as " nominated members." Qualification for Membership of the Council. 8. Every person not disqualified under the next succeeding article shall be qualified for election or appointment as a member if he is qualified to be registered as a voter in any electoral district and is actually so registered in any such district; provided that a person shall not be disqualified for election or appointment as a member by reason only of the fact that he is not actually registered



as a voter if he shall have been prevented from being so registered solely by delay in the revision of a register after the date by which the same should have been revised in accordance with the law for the time being in force, or by absence from the island during the whole of the last preceding period within which application for registration as a voter might have been made in accordance with such law. 9. No person shall be capable of being elected or appointed as a member or of sitting or voting in the Council as an elected or nominated member who-(a) is not a British subject; or (b) is unable to speak, read and write the English language; or (c) holds any public office under the Crown in the island; or (d) directly or indirectly, himself or by any other person whatsoever in trust for him or for his use or benefit or on his account, holds or enjoys, in the whole or in part, any contract or agreement or commission made or entered into with or accepted from any person for or on account provided that nothing herein of the public service; contained shall extend to any pension or gratuity granted from the public revenue or other funds of the island in respect of past public service, nor to any contract, agreement or commission entered into or accepted by any incorporated trading company in its corporate capacity, nor to any company consisting of more than 10 persons, when such contract, agreement or commission shall be made, entered into or accepted for the general benefit of such incorporation or company; or (e) is an uncertificated or undischarged bankrupt or insolvent; or (f) is serving a sentence of penal servitude or imprisonment imposed by any court in any part of His Majesty's dominions or in any country under His Majesty's protection or in respect of which a mandate is being exercised by the Government of any part of His Majesty's dominions, for an offence punishable with hard labour or rigorous imprisonment for a term exceeding 12 months; or is under sentence of death imposed by any such court, or is serving any term of imprisonment awarded in lieu of execution of such sentence; or (g) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind; or (h) is incapable of being registered as a voter or of being elected as a member by reason of his conviction of a corrupt or illegal practice or by reason of the report of an election judge in accordance with the law for the time


being in force relating to the election of members of the Council; or (i) would have been incapable of being elected as a member of the Legislative Council established under the Orders in Council of 1923 to 1930, by reason of his conviction for a corrupt or illegal practice under those Orders, if those Orders had not been revoked. 10. Except for the purpose of electing the Speaker of the Council, no member of the Council shall sit or vote therein until he shall have taken and subscribed before the Council the oath of allegiance in the form given in this article, or shall have made and subscribed before the Council an affirmation in the corresponding form. Form of Oath. I, A.B., do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King George V, his heirs and successors according to law. So help me God. 11.-(1) A person shall be liable to a penalty of 500 rupees for every day on which he shall sit or vote in the Council knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is disqualified by this Order for so sitting or voting or that his seat has become vacant. (2) The penalty imposed by this article shall be recoverable in the District Court of Colombo by any person who shall sue for the same; provided that no person shall bring an action for the recovery of any such penalty without first obtaining leave from the District Judge of the Court, who shall have full discretion to grant or refuse such leave and whose decision in the exercise of such discretion shall be final. Nominated Members. 12. The nominated members of the Council shall be appointed by the Governor by an instrument under the Public Seal of the island in pursuance of His Majesty's Instructions through the Secretary of State or provisionally subject to the conditions hereinafter prescribed. 13. A nominated member whose seat shall have become vacant may be reappointed by the Governor in manner aforesaid. 14.-(1) When there shall be a vacancy in the number of seats in the Council allotted for nominated members, any person appointed to be a nominated member to fill such vacancy shall, unless appointed in pursuance of Instructions from His Majesty communicated to the Governor through the Secretary of State, be appointed provisionally.


(2) Every provisional appointment shall without delay be reported to His Majesty through the Secretary of State and may be disallowed or confirmed by His Majesty through the Secretary of State. (3) Every person so provisionally appointed shall be to all intents and purposes a member of the Council unless and until his appointment shall be disallowed and notice of such disallowance shall be published in the Government Gazette, and if his appointment shall be confirmed by His Majesty notice of such confirmation shall be published in the Government Gazette and thereupon the appointment of such member shall cease to be provisional and shall thenceforth be in all respects as though it had been made in pursuance of Instructions from His Majesty.
Vacation of Seats in the Council.

15. The seat in the Council of an elected or nominated member shall become vacant(a) upon his death; or (b) if by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor he shall resign his seat in the Council; or (c) if he shall become incapable of sitting or voting as a member by reason of any of the provisions of article 9; or (d) if he shall become the citizen or subject of any foreign State or Power or shall make any declaration or acknowledgment of allegiance to any foreign State or Power; or (e) if his election shall be vacated or made void by reason of the commission of any corrupt or illegal practice or by reason of the declaration, certificate or report of an election judge; or (f) if, without the leave of the Council first obtained, he shall be absent from the sittings of the Council for a continuous period of 3 months; or (g) if, in the case of a person provisionally appointed to be a nominated member, his appointment shall be disallowed by His Majesty and notice of such disallowance
shall be published in the Government Gazette; or

(h) upon the dissolution of the Council.
Precedence among Members.

16.-(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (5) of this article, the Officers of State shall take precedence of the other members, and shall rank among themselves in the order in which their offices are hereinbefore mentioned. (2) The Speaker of the Council shall take precedence next after the Officers of State.




(3) Members who are Ministers shall take precedence next after the Speaker and among themselves the first in order of precedence shall be the Minister elected by the Board of Ministers to be the Vice-Chairman thereof, and the other Ministers shall rank after him in the order of the date of their appointment as Ministers, and two or more Ministers appointed on the same day shall rank in the alphabetical order of their names, provided that a Minister reappointed as a Minister, whether to the same office or to another, shall, except in regard to the Vice-Chairman of the Board of Ministers, take precedence according to the date from which he shall have held office as a Minister without an interruption of more than one month. (4) The Deputy Speaker shall rank next after the Ministers, and the Deputy Chairman of Committees shall rank next after the Deputy Speaker. (5) At any meeting of the Council the Speaker, when presiding, or in his absence the Deputy Speaker or other presiding member, shall have precedence over all other members of the Council. Powers and Procedure of the State Council. General. 17.-(1) The Council shall meet in session at such time, not being later than one month after the completion of every general election, as the Governor shall appoint by Proclamation in the Government Gazette. (2) The Council shall remain in session from the time when it shall meet after every general election until it shall be dissolved, provided that the Council may adjourn from time to time in accordance with the standing orders of the Council; and provided further that the Governor may at any time summon a meeting of the Council by Proclamation in the Government Gazette. 18. The Governor may at any time by Proclamation in the Government Gazette dissolve the Council. 19. The Governor shall dissolve the Council at the expiration of 4 years from the completion of the last preceding general election if it shall not sooner have been dissolved. 20. The Governor shall have the right of addressing the Council and may for that purpose require the attendance of its members. 21. Subject to the provisions of articles 22, 26, 46 and 80, all questions proposed for decision in the Council shall be determined by a majority of the votes given on such questions, provided that the Speaker or other presiding member shall not vote unless the votes of the other



members shall be equally divided; in such case he shall give the casting vote. 22.-(1) If the Governor shall consider that it is of paramount importance to the public interest, or essential to give effect to any of the provisions of this Order, that any bill, motion, resolution or vote which the Council is empowered to pass, in the exercise of either its legislative or its executive functions, should have effect, then in such ease, notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Order or cf any standing orders made under this Order(a) it shall be lawful for any Officer of State, acting by the authority and under the instructions of the Governor, to propose any such bill, motion, resolution, or vote to the Council and the same shall have priority over all other business of the Council; (b) the Governor may declare that any such bill, or any part of any such bill or any such motion, resolution, or vote is of paramount importance or is essential to give effect to the provisions of this Order, and thereupon such bill, part of a bill, motion, resolution, or vote shall have effect as if it had been passed by the Council. Such declaration may be made by the Governor by message addressed to the Speaker or by an Officer of State, acting by the authority and on the instructions of the Governor, either before or after the votes of the members have been taken. (2) Any bill which shall have effect, in whole or in part, by reason of a declaration made by the Governor in accordance with this article, shall be expressed to be enacted by the Governor and, upon being signed by the Governor, shall be of the same force and effect as though it had been passed by the Council and had received the Governor's assent, and shall be subject to disallowance by His Majesty in like manner; and all the provisions of this Order which relate to bills passed by the Council, or to the assent of the Governor to such bills, shall apply to bills enacted by the Governor in accordance with this article, or to the signing of such bills by him, as the case may require. 23.-(l) The Governor shall forthwith report to the Secretary of State every case in which he shall make any such declaration as is mentioned in the preceding article, and the reasons therefor. (2) If any member objects to any such declaration, he may, within 7 days of the making thereof, submit to the Governor a statement in writing of his reasons for so objecting, and a copy of such statement shall be appended to the report of the Governor required by this article. (3) Any such declaration, other than a declaration relating to a bill or to any part of a bill, may be revoked



by the Secretary of State, and the Governor shall notify such revocation to the Council, and from the date of such notification any motion, resolution, or vote which shall have had effect by reason of the declaration revoked shall cease to have effect, but without prejudice to anything lawfully done thereunder. 24. The Council shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy or vacancies among the Officers of State or among the nominated or elected members. 25. No business, except that of adjournment, shall be transacted unless there shall be present at least 20 members, exclusive of the Officers of State, in addition to the Speaker or other presiding member. 26.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Order, standing orders may be made for the regulation of the business and procedure of the Council, the preservation of order at meetings of the Council, prescribing the terms and conditions upon which any remuneration or allowance payable to members by reason of their membership of the Council may be paid, and for all other purposes authorised or required by this Order. (2) The first standing orders of the Council shall be made by the Governor, with the approval of the Secretary of State, but may be amended, rescinded, or supplemented by the Council; provided that no amendment or rescission of, and no addition to the standing orders shall have effect unless the same shall be passed by a two-thirds maj6rity of all members of the Council, excluding the Officers of State and the Speaker or other presiding member. 27.-(1) The Governor shall appoint a person to be the Clerk of the Council and such other persons to perform such duties as officers of the Council as he shall think fit, and may at any time revoke any such appointment. (2) The power conferred upon the Governor by this article shall include a power to appoint a person to perform temporarily the duties of the Clerk or of any other officer of the Council whenever in the Governor's opinion circumstances shall so require, and to revoke any such temporary appointment at any time. (3) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this article the Governor shall consult the Speaker, or the member presiding in the Council for the time being in the place of the Speaker; provided that, prior to the first election of a Speaker under this Order, or in the interval between a dissolution of the Council and the next subsequent election of a Speaker, the Governor may make any such appointment as aforesaid provisionally, and may thereafter confirm or revoke the same after consultation



with the Speaker; provided, also, that the Governor may, subject to such conditions as he shall prescribe, delegate to the Speaker, or other presiding member, all or any of the powers conferred upon him by this article. 28. Before the commencement of every meeting of the Council, a statement of all business to be brought before the Council at that meeting shall be communicated by the Clerk of the Council to each member and to the Governor, and the Clerk shall also transmit to the Governor a copy of every document, other than petitions, presented to the Council. 29. Minutes shall be regularly kept of all the proceedings of the Council, and copies of the said minutes shall be transmitted by the Clerk of the Council to the Governor as soon as possible after each meeting of the Council and the Governor shall transmit a copy of the said minutes to the Secretary of State. 30.-(1) At the first meeting of the Council after the commencement of this Order and thereafter at the first meeting after every general election, and before proceeding to the despatch of any other business, the Council shall elect a member to be the Speaker. (2) As soon as may be after the election of Executive Committees and of Ministers in accordance with the provisions of articles 34 and 35, the Council shall elect two members to be, respectively, the Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees (herein called " the Deputy Speaker ") and the Deputy Chairman of Committees. (3) Each person elected to be the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, or Deputy Chairman of Committees shall hold office until the next dissolution of the Council, unless he shall sooner resign such office or cease, from any cause whatsoever, to be a member of the Council. (4) In the case of a vacancy in any of such offices, another Speaker or Deputy Speaker, or Deputy Chairman of Committees, as the case may be, shall be elected by the Council at the beginning of the next meeting after the occurrence of the vacancy. (5) The Speaker, or in his absence the Deputy Speaker, and in the absence of both Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the Deputy Chairman of Committees shall preside at the meetings of the Council. In the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, and the Deputy Chairman of Committees, some member elected by the Council shall preside. (6) There shall be paid to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, and the Deputy Chairman of Committees such salary as may be determined by the Council with the approval of the Governor.



31.-(1) As soon as may be after the election of Executive Committees and Ministers after each general election in accordance with the provisions of articles 34 and 35, the Council shall be divided by the Speaker into two Standing Committees, which shall be called, respectively, " Standing Committee A" and " Standing Committee B," for the consideration of such legislative measures as the Council shall not decide to refer, in the first instance, either to a Committee of the whole Council or to a Select Committee of the Council. (2) The said Standing Committees shall remain in office until the next succeeding dissolution of the Council after they shall have been formed. (3) Subject to the provisions of this article, the composition of the said Standing Committees, and the procedure at meetings of the same, shall be as may be determined by the Standing Orders of the Council, provided that every member of the Council, except the Speaker and the Officers of State, shall be a member of one of such Committees. (4) The Deputy Speaker, or in his absence such member of the Committee as the Committee shall elect, shall preside over Standing Committee A, and the Deputy Chairman of Committees, or in his absence such member of the Committee as the Committee shall elect, shall preside over Standing Committee B. (5) The Officers of State shall have the right to attend any meeting of either of the aforesaid Standing Committees and to address the Committee upon any question before the Committee, but shall not vote. (6) Any member of the Council in charge of any bill referred to either of the aforesaid Standing Committees, if not a member of that Committee, shall nevertheless have the right to attend any meeting at which such bill shall be under discussion and to address the Committee upon the bill, and, unless he is an Officer of State, to vote as a member of the Committee upon any question arising in connection with such bill. (7) The standing orders of the Council may provide for the addition to either of the said Standing Committees of any member or members of the other Standing Committee, whenever in the opinion of the Council any such addition shall be expedient in order to assist the consideration of any question referred to either of the said Committees.
Executive Functions of the Council.

32.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Order, the State Council shall be charged with the administration of the subjects and functions of government specified in the



seven groups given in the first schedule to this Order or in any amendment of that schedule, or which shall be deemed to be included in any of those groups in accordance with this article. (2) The Council may, by resolution, amend the first schedule, and may declare that any subjects or functions not expressly mentioned in that schedule shall be deemed to be included in any of the groups specified therein, provided that no subject or function included in the second schedule to this Order shall be included in the first schedule, and provided, further, that the division into seven groups of such subjects and functions as may be included in the first schedule shall be preserved: but no such resolution or declaration shall have effect until it has been approved b the Governor. (3) Until the first election of Executive Committees and 6he first appointment of Ministers, after the commencement of this Order shall be complete, the Governor may exercise the power given to the Council by the preceding clause of this article to declare that any subjects or functions not expressly mentioned in the first schedule shall be deemed to be included in any of the groups specified therein. (4) If any doubt shall arise as to which group in the first schedule includes any subject or function not expressly mentioned in that schedule, or in any declaration by the Governor or by the Council in accordance with this article, the decision of the Council shall, subject to approval by the Governor, be final. (5) Until the first election of Executive Committees and the first appointment of Ministers after the commencement of this Order shall be complete, the executive functions hereby committed to the Council shall be vested in the Governor. 33.-(1) Each of the Officers of State shall, subject to the provisions of this Order, and to the directions of the Governor, have charge of the subjects and shall exercise the functions allotted to him in the second schedule to this Order, or in any amendment of that schedule or which shall be deemed to be included in the group allotted to him in accordance with this article. (2) The Governor may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, amend the second schedule, and may, in his own discretion, declare that any subject or function not expressly mentioned in the second schedule shall be deemed to be included in any of the groups specified therein, provided that no subject or function included in the first schedule to this Order shall be included in the second schedule. (3) If any doubt shall arise as to whether any subject


or function is included in the first schedule or in the second schedule, the decision of the Secretary of State shall be final.
Executive Committees and Ministers.

34.-.(1) At the first meeting of the Council after the commencement- of this Order and thereafter at the first meeting after every general election, the Council shall elect by secret ballot from among its members seven Executive Committees each of which shall be charged, until the next following dissolution of the Council, with the administration, subject to the provisions of this Order, of such one of the seven groups of subjects and functions specified in the first schedule hereto as the Council when electing the Committee shall determine. (2) The Council shall proceed to the election of the aforesaid Committees as soon as may be after the election of a Speaker as provided by article 30, and before proceeding to the despatch of any other business. Each Committee shall contain as nearly as possible an equal number of members and every member of the Council, except the Speaker and the Officers of State, shall be elected to one of such Committees, and no member of the Council shall be elected to more than one, provided that a member of a Committee elected to be the Deputy Speaker or Deputy Chairman of Committees or to fill any vacancy in the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker or Deputy Chairman of Committees in accordance with article 30, shall, upon such election, cease to be a member of such Committee. (3) Subject to the provisions of this article procedure for the election of Executive Committees and for the filling of subsequent vacancies in any such Committee and for the transfer of members from one Committee to another shall be as prescribed by the standing orders of the Council. 35.-(1) As soon as may be after the election of Executive Committees in accordance with article 34, and before the Council proceeds to any other business, each Executive Committee shall elect a Chairman by secret ballot from among its members, and whenever the office of Chairman of an Executive Committee shall become vacant, the Committee shall, in like manner, elect a member thereof to be the Chairman of the Committee. (2) The member elected by the Committee to be the Chairman thereof shall be appointed by the Governor to be the Minister for that group of subjects and functions which the Committee of which he is the Chairman was elected to administer; provided that the Governor may, in his discretion, decline to appoint as a Minister any member of a Committee so elected as aforesaid, and, in 

such case, the election of such member as the Chairman of the Committee shall be void and the Committee shall elect another member to be the Chairman thereof. (3) If at any time any Minister shall be prevented temporarily by absence from the island, or by illness or other sufficient cause, from exercising the functions of his office, the Committee of which that Minister is the Chairman may, with the approval of the Governor, elect another member of the Committee to act as the Chairman of the Committee until the Minister shall resume the exercise of the functions of his office. A member so elected shall be appointed by the Governor to act in place of the Minister until such time as aforesaid; provided that the Governor may, in his discretion, decline to appoint the member so elected and the Committee shall thereupon elect another member to act for the Minister. All the provisions of this Order which apply to a Minister shall apply to any member appointed to act for a Minister during the period of such appointment. (4) Subject to the provisions of this article, the procedure for election of the Chairman and Acting Chairmen of Executive Committees shall be as prescribed by the standing orders of the Council. (5) There shall be paid to each Minister such salary as may be determined by the Council with the approval of the Governor. 36. Every member appointed to be a Minister shall before entering on the duties of his office take and subscribe before the Governor an oath in the following form, or shall make and subscribe before the Governor an affirmation in the corresponding form. Form of Oath. I, A.B., do swear that I will well and truly serve His Majesty King George V in the office of Minister for ........................ So help me God. 37. Upon an address presented to him by the Council praying for the termination of the appointment of any member as a Minister, the Governor may at any time terminate such member's appointment and such member shall thereupon cease to be the Chairman of the Executive Committee of which he is a member. 38.-(1) No member shall be eligible for appointment as a Minister who is a director of any company having any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any contract with the Government of the island. (2) If any Minister shall become a director of any such company as aforesaid during his term of office as a Minister, his appointment as a Minister shall thereupon become void



and he shall cease to be the Chairman of the Executive Committee of which he is a member. 39.-(1) Each Executive Committee shall -exercise general control over the departments of Government concerned with subjects or functions in the Committee's charge; and the exercise of such control and the transaction of business relating to any such subjects or functions shall be regulated by such procedure as the Governor shall prescribe, provided that the procedure prescribed by the Governor may from time to time be amended or varied by the Council with the approval of the Governor. (2) The transaction of business concerning any- subjects or functions in the charge of an Officer of State shall be regulated by such procedure as the Governor shall prescribe. 40.-(1) The Governor shall appoint some person to be the Secretary to each Minister and may at any time revoke A person appointed to be the any such appointment. Secretary to a Minister shall also be the Clerk to the Executive Committee of which that Minister is the Chairman. (2) The power conferred upon the Governor by this article shall include a power to appoint a person to perform temporarily the duties of the Secretary to a Minister and Clerk to an Executive Committee whenever, in the Governor's opinion, circumstances shall so require and to revoke any such temporary appointment at any time. (3) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this article the Governor shall consult the Minister concerned, provided that the Governor may, subject to such conditions as he shall prescribe, delegate to any Minister the power to make and to revoke any temporary appointment authorised by this article. 41.-(1) Executive Committees shall meet whenever summoned by the Clerk either by direction of the Chairman or at the request of any three members of the Committee. (2) In the absence of the Chairman, such member of the Committee as the Committee may elect shall preside at the meetings of the Committee. (3) No business shall be transacted unless there shall be present at least three members in addition to the Chairman or presiding member and the Clerk. (4) All questions proposed in an Executive Committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members of the Committee there present and voting. The Chairman or presiding member shall have an original vote on all such questions, and also a casting vote if the votes shall be equally divided.



(5) A statement of all matters for discussion at any meeting of a Committee shall be forwarded by the Clerk to each member and to the Governor and to the Chief Secretary before the meeting is held. The Clerk shall also forward to the Governor and to the Chief Secretary copies of any document to be laid before the Committee if copies are available. (6) The Clerk shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Committee and shall forward a copy of the minutes to the Governor and to the Chief Secretary as soon as may be after each meeting. (7) An Executive Committee shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy or vacancies among the members thereof. (8) Subject to the provisions of this article, the procedure at the meetings of any Executive Committee shall be such as the standing orders of the Council may prescribe. 42. The Governor may require any Minister to furnish him with reports upon and any official documents relating to any matters falling under the control of the Executive Committee of which that Minister is the Chairman. 43. The Chief Secretary, or his deputy, shall be entitled to attend any meeting of any Executive Committee and to address the Committee upon any subject, but may not vote. 44.-(1) When the affairs of any Government department which is concerned with subjects or functions in the charge of an Executive Committee shall be under discussion at any meeting of the Committee, the head of such department shall be entitled to attend the meeting and to be heard by the Committee upon the affairs of his department which are under discussion, and it shall be the duty of the Clerk to the Committee to give notice to the head of any such department of the time and place at which the affairs of that department will be discussed by the Committee. (2) A Minister, or his Committee, may at any time require the head of a department concerned with subjects or functions in the charge of the Committee to attend, or to cause any other officer or officers of that department to attend, any meeting of the Committee when the affairs of that department are under discussion. 45.-(1) When the decision of an Executive Committee requires that any direction shall be given to any Government department concerned with subjects or functions in the Committee's charge, even such direction shall be conveyed to the head of such department by the 'Minister, or in writing by the Clerk to the Committee by direction of the Minister, but save as provided by this article




and by article 48, no such direction. shall be given until the approval of such decision by the Council and the ratification of the same by the Governor shall have been received by the Minister in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained. (2) When, in the opinion of an Executive Committee, any decision of the Committee shall not be of sufficient importance to require the approval of the Council or the ratification of the Governor before the issue of directions to carry the decision into effect, or when the decision shall, in the opinion of the Committee, require action to be taken too urgently to enable such prior approval or ratification to be obtained, the directions of the Committee may be conveyed to the head of the department concerned and action may be taken in accordance therewith without such prior approval or ratification. In every such case, the Committee shall without delay report to the Council the decision of the Committee and the directions issued thereon and the reasons why such directions were issued without such prior approval and ratification as aforesaid, and the Council shall report the same to the Governor. (3) The Governor or the Council may require that in the case of such decisions, or classes of decisions, by Executive Committees as may be specified by the Governor or by the Council, as the case may be, no directions shall be issued by an Executive Committee to carry such decisions into effect without such prior approval and ratification as aforesaid. (4) The Council may, with the approval of the Governor, by resolution, authorise any Executive Committee to issue directions, without such prior approval by the Council and ratification by the Governor as aforesaid, for the purpose of giving effect to such decisions or classes of decisions as the resolution may specify. Whenever a Committee shall issue directions in pursuance of such authority as aforesaid, the Committee shall without delay report to the Council the decision of the Committee and the directions issued thereon, and the Council shall report the same to the Governor. 46.-(1) Every decision of an Executive Committee which shall require the approval of the Council shall be embodied in a report which shall include the recommendations of the Committee and shall be presented to the Council for consideration. (2) The Council may accept or reject any such report or may refer it back to the Committee for further consideration. If passed by the Council, the report, or such part thereof as shall have been passed, shall be submitted to the Governor by the Council for ratification. (3) The Governor may either ratify or decline to ratify


any report so submitted to him as aforesaid, or may refer the same, or any part thereof, back to the Council for further consideration, or he may refer the same or any part thereof to the Secretary of State, or he may declare that the report involves an important question of principle, and may require that, before he shall give his decision thereon, the report shall be resubmitted to the Council and shall be passed by a two-thirds majority of all the members of the Council, excluding the Officers of State and the Speaker or other presiding member. (4) The decision of the Governor, or of the Secretary of State, upon any such report shall be communicated by the Governor to the Council, and by the Council to the Executive Committee concerned, and if the report or any part thereof shall have been ratified by the Governor or approved by the Secretary of State, the Committee shall transmit the report, or such part thereof as shall have been so ratified or approved as aforesaid, to the head of each department concerned with the subjects or functions to which the report relates and it& shall be the duty of the head of each of such departments to give effect to the report or to such part thereof as shall have been so ratified or approved as aforesaid. (5) If the Governor shall decline to ratify any report so submitted to him as aforesaid, or any part thereof, he shall without delay report his decision and his reasons therefor to the Secretary of State, who may confirm or vary such decision. If the decision of the Governor shall be varied by the Secretary of State, the Governor shall report the Secretary of State's decision to the Council, and the Council shall communicate the same to the Executive Committee concerned and such Committee shall thereupon direct that effect be given thereto. 47.-(1) Every report required by this Order to be made by an Executive Committee to the Council shall be presented to the Council by the Chairman of the Committee, or, in the absence of the Chairman, by such member of the Committee as the Committee may appoint. (2) Every report required by this Order to be submitted by the Council to the Governor shall be submitted to him by the Speaker, or other presiding member, and the Governor's decision upon any such report shall be given by him by message to the Speaker, or other presiding member, for communication to the Council. (3) The Council shall communicate with Executive Committees in such manner as the standing orders of the Council shall provide. 48.-(1) Nothing contained in articles 45 or 46 shall apply to the exercise of any power conferred upon any



Minister or Executive Committee by. delegation from the
Governor under article 94 or article 95 or otherwise by any written law, and directions may be issued to Government departments in the exercise of any such power without the prior approval of the Council and ratification by the Governor to which articles 45 and 46 refer; provided that the Governor may require that any power so delegated by him shall not be exercised without the prior approval of the Council or ratification by him, or without both such prior approval and ratification, or that decisions of Executive Committees in the exercise of any such power, or for the purpose of advising a Minister in the exercise of any such power, shall be reported to the Council. (2) Decisions of Executive Committees made for the purpose of advising the Governor upon the exercise of any power vested in him shall not be deemed to be decisions which must be reported to the Council unless the Governor shall so require. Governor's Emergency Powers. 49.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, whenever the Governor shall consider that a state of emergency has arisen or is imminent, whether from the danger of enemy action or of civil disorder, or from any grave cause, he may by proclamation assume control of any Government department and issue such orders to that department as he may see fit, provided that, in every such case, he shall make a full report immediately to the Secretary of State; and provided, further, that if the Governor with the advice and consent of the Council shall make provision by law to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State for the exercise by the Governor of such emergency powers, the Secretary of State may declare that this clause of this article shall cease to have effect and on the publication of such declaration in the Government Gazette this clause of this article shall cease to have effect accordingly. (2) The Governor shall not assent to -any bill repealing or amending any such law as aforesaid unless he shall have previously obtained His Majesty's instructions through the Secretary of State. The Board of Ministers and Financial Provisions. 50.-(1) There shall be a Board of Ministers which shall be composed of the Officers of State and the Ministers. (2) The Officers of State shall not be entitled to vote upon any question submitted to the Board, but shall have the rights and privileges of membership of the Board in all other respects. 




(3) The Chief Secretary shall be the Chairman of the Board and there shall be a Vice-Chairman who shall be elected by the Board from among the Ministers. (4) If at any time the Vice-Chairman of the Board of Ministers shall be prevented by absence from the island, or by illness or other sufficient cause, from exercising the functions of his office, the Board may elect another Minister to act as Vice-Chairman until the Vice-Chairman shall resume the exercise of the functions of his office, and all the provisions of this Order which apply to the Vice-Chairman of the Board of Ministers shall apply to the Minister so elected during the period for which he shall act as Vice-Chairman of the Board. (5) The Chief Secretary shall preside over the Board of Ministers, and in his absence, the Vice-Chairman of the Board shall preside. 51. The Vice-Chairman of the Board of Ministers shall be the representative of the Board in the Council and shall be styled " the Leader of the State Council." 52. The Governor shall appoint some fit person to be Secretary to the Board of Ministers, and may at any time revoke any such appointment. The Governor may also appoint a person to perform temporarily the duties of the Secretary to the Board whenever, in his opinion, circumstances shall so require, and may at any time revoke any auch temporary appointment. 53.-(1) The Board of Ministers shall not proceed to the despatch of business unless duly summoned by the Chief Secretary who may from time to time, and shall whenever the Vice-Chairman so requests, convene a meeting of the Board. (2) No business shall be transacted unless there shall be present at least three members, exclusive of the Officers of State. (3) All questions proposed to the Board of Ministers shall be decided by a majority of the Ministers there present and voting and, save as provided by article 71, no member of the board shall have more than one vote. (4) A statement of all matters for discussion at any meeting of the Board shall be forwarded by the Secretary to each member and to the Governor before the meeting is held. The Secretary shall also forward to the Governor a copy of any document to be laid before the Board if a copy is available. (5) The Secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Board and shall forward a copy of the minutes "o the Governor as soon as may be after each meeting. (6) The Board shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy or vacancies among the members thereof.



(7) Subject to the provisions of this article, the procedure at meetings of the Board shall be such as the Board shall prescribe, 54. In the discharge of any function or duty imposed by this Order upon the Board of Ministers, the Board may require the head of any Government department to attend or to cause any other officer of his department to attend, any meeting of the Board and to give such assistance to the Board as the Board may require. 55. Subject to the provisions of article 22, the Board of Ministers shall determine the order in which any business, whether executive or legislative, to be brought before the Council, by the Board of Ministers or by any Executive Committee or Officer of State, shall be despatched, and may prescribe the procedure by which the settlement of questions affecting more than one Executive Committee shall be arranged. 56.-(1) It shall be the duty of the Board of Ministers to prepare, in consultation with the Financial Secretary, the annual estimates of revenue and expenditure for the island and all supplementary estimates of expenditure. (2) The annual estimates of expenditure shall state under distinct heads every item which is expected to come in course of payment during the year to which the estimates relate and, in addition to items of expenditure which shall require the approval of the Council, shall include in a separate column items of expenditure already authorised by law. Each head of expenditure shall be divided into such sub-heads as the Board of Ministers shall decide. (3) The annual estimates of revenue and expenditure and all supplementary estimates of expenditure, when approved by the Board of Ministers, shall be laid before the Council for the information of members. 57.-(1) Subject to the provisions of article 22, no bill, motion, resolution, or vote for the disposal of, or the imposition of charges upon, any part of the public revenue or other funds of the island, or for the authorisation of any prior disposal of any part of such revenue or funds or for the imposition or augmentation of any tax or for the repeal or reduction of any tax for the time being in force, shall be introduced in the Council by any member except a Minister or an Officer of State, nor unless such bill, motion, resolution, or vote shall have received the prior approval of the Board of Ministers. (2) Every bill, motion, resolution, or vote introduced in the Council for any of the purposes mentioned in the preceding clause of this article shall be accompanied by a report from the Board of Ministers explaining the financial



implications thereof and including the observations of the Financial Secretary thereon.
(3) In this article the expression
"

tax

"

does

not

include any tax raised by local authorities or bodies for local purposes. 58.-(1) Each Minister and each Officer of State shall, not later than the month of April in each year, submit to the Board of Ministers, through the Financial Secretary, the estimates of expenditure proposed by the Minister's Executive Committee, or by the Officer of State, as the case may be, for the ensuing financial year in connection with the subjects or functions under the control of such Committee or Officer of State; provided that no such estimate shall be submitted to the Board of Ministers until the Executive Committee or Officer of State by whom the same shall be proposed shall have consulted the Financial Secretary and shall have considered his report. (2) If any Minister or Officer of State shall fail to comply with the provisions of the preceding clause of this article, the Governor may cause to be prepared, with such assistance as he may require from the Board of Ministers and from the heads of any Government departments, an estimate of expenditure for the ensuing financial year in connection with the subjects or functions under the control of such Executive Committee or Officer of State, and may forward the same, certified under his hand, to the Board of Ministers, and the Board shall deal with an estimate so received from the Governor in all respects as though it had been received from a Minister or Officer of State in accordance with this article. 59.-(1) The annual estimates of expenditure for the island, to the extent to which such expenditure shall not previously have been authorised by any law in force in the island, shall be embodied in a bill, in this Order called " The Annual Appropriation Bill," which shall be submitted annually to the Council in or about the month of June or as soon thereafter as circumstances will permit. (2) In every Annual Appropriation Bill the expenditure proposed shall be allocated to specific purposes under distinct heads corresponding to the heads mentioned in the annual estimates in accordance with article 56. (3) The authority for expenditure which the passage into law of any such bill shall convey shall lapse at the end of the financial year to which the bill relates. 60. All disbursements of the public revenue or other funds of the island in any financial year which shall not have been authorised by the passage into law of the Annual Appropriation Bill for that year or otherwise by any law in force in the island shall be specified in a bill, in this


Order called " The Supplementary Appropriation Bill," which shall be submitted to the Council as soon as may be after the close of the financial year in which such disbursements were made. 61. Whenever any payment of public money shall be, or shall have been, authorised by this Order or by any other law in force in the island other than the Annual Appropriation Law, it shall be lawful for the Financial Secretary, with the authority of the Governor, to make any such payment, and to accept a charge upon his accounts in respect of any such payment. 62. Subject to the provisions of article 66, the Financial Secretary shall not make any payment of public money or accept any charge on his accounts in any financial year in respect of services for which provision -has been made in the Annual Appropriation Law for that year, unless he shall be authorised to do so by(a) a general warrant, signed by the Governor, in accordance with the provisions of article 63; (b) a requisition, approved by the Governor, in accordance with the provisions of article 64. 63. As soon as may be after the enactment of the Annual Appropriation Law for any year, the Financial Secretary shall prepare a complete schedule of the personal emoluments and other public services provided for in the estimates and in the Annual Appropriation Law for that year over which the Board of Ministers does not desire to retain a special control and of the provision authorised by that law in respect of the same. Such schedule shall be annexed to the general warrant which, when signed by the Governor, shall authorise payments by the Financial Secretary monthly, or at such periods as may be necessary during the year, in respect of the services therein enumerated. .64. Whenever in the opinion of an Executive Committee or of an Officer of State, after prior consultation with the Financial Secretary, it shall be necessary to incur expenditure on a service for which provision shall have been made in the Annual Appropriation Law, but the expenditure on which shall not have been authorised by the general warrant, the Minister or Officer of State, as the case may be, shall forward to the Board of Ministers, through the Financial Secretary, a requisition stating the whole extent and estimated cost of the service required and the reasons therefor, and no such expenditure shall be incurred until the requisition shall have been approved by the Board of Ministers and by the Governor. 65.-(1) Whenever in the opinion of an Executive Committee or of an Officer of State, after prior consultation with the Financial Secretary, it shall be necessary to incur expenditure for which provision shall not have been made in the Annual Appropriation Law or by this Order or by any other law in force in the island, the Minister or Officer of State, as the case may be, shall forward to the Board of Ministers, through the Financial Secretary, a statement showing the whole extent and estimated cost of the service required and the reasons therefor. (2) If the Board of Ministers shall approve any such expenditure as aforesaid, the Board shall include the same in a supplementary estimate and shall submit the same for the approval of the Council, and no such expenditure shall be incurred unless the said estimate of the Board shall have been approved -by the Council and ratified by the Governor nor until the same shall be authorised by special warrant approved by the Board and signed by the Governor. (3) Whenever the Board of Ministers shall propose any expenditure for the approval of the Council in accordance with this article, the Board shall present to the Council a report explaining the nature and extent of the expenditure the reasons therefor and including the observations of Financial Secretary thereon. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 62 and 65, if the Board of Ministers shall decline to include in the general warrant- or to approve a requisition or special expenditure which shall be provided for warrant for, any t in the Annual Appropriation Law for in the estimates any year, or which shall be approved by a vote passed by the Council or having effect as though it had been so passed, the Governor may, by warrant under his hand, authorise the Financial Secretary to make any payment, or to accept any charge upon his accounts, in respect of any such expenditure. 67.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 65, if the Board of Ministers shall consider that any expenditure to which that article refers shall be required too urgently to enable the provisions of that article to be observed before such expenditure is incurred, the Board may submit to the Governor a special warrant to authorise such expenditure, in anticipation of the approval of the Council, on the personal responsibility of every Minister who shall have approved the same, and such warrant, when signed by the Governor, shall authorise the Financial Secretary to make any payment or to accept any charge on his accounts in accordance therewith. (2) A report of any expenditure incurred under the authority of a special warrant issued under this article, including the observations of the Financial Secretary


thereon, shall be submitted by the Board of Ministers for the approval of the Council at the earliest opportunity. 68. Any Annual or Supplementary Appropriation Bill and any bill, motion, resolution, or vote to which article 57 refers may be referred by the Council to the Board of Ministers for further consideration, provided that the Council shall not so refer any such bill, motion, resolution, or vote for further consideration more than once, and provided further that if the Council shall not have passed, with or without amendment, any Annual Appropriation Bill within 3 months after the first reading of the bill shall have been moved, the Council shall be deemed to have rejected the bill. 69.-(l) If the Council, with or without reference to the Board of Ministers for further consideration, shall reject the whole of any Annual Appropriation Bill, the Governor shall dissolve the Council. (2) The Governor shall also dissolve the Council if, in his opinion, by reason of the decision of the Council upon any bill, motion, resolution or vote, to which article 57 refers, or upon any motion expressly directed to test the confidence of the Council in the Board of Ministers, it shall be apparent that the Board no longer retains the confidence of the Council. 70. If at any time the Council shall be dissolved before financial provision shall have been made for the essential public services of the island sufficient for the period which must elapse before such provision can be made by a new Council, it shall be lawful for the Governor by warrant under his hand to authorise the Financial Secretary to make such disbursements from the public revenue and other funds of the island as shall be sufficient for such services during such period, but no longer. 71. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Order, upon a dissolution of the Council and until the next succeeding election of Executive Committees and appointment of Ministers in accordance with this Order, the following provisions shall have effect:(a) The -executive functions committed to the Council by article 32 shall be vested in the Board of Ministers as constituted immediately prior to the dissolution of the Council, and that Board shall continue to be styled " the Board of Ministers," and to have and to exercise, as nearly as may be, all the powers and functions which it had and exercised immediately prior to the dissolution of the Council. (b) All the powers and functions conferred by this Order, or by any other law, upon any Executive Committee, except the election of a Chairman of the Committee, shall



be vested in the person who, immediately prior to the dissolution of the Council, was the Chairman of that Executive Committee,. and such person shall continue to be styled " Minister," and to have and exercise, during the period aforesaid, all the powers and functions which, immediately prior to the dissolution of the Council, he had and exercised as a Minister. (c) All the provisions of this Order which relate to reports from Executive Committees to the Council, shall relate, as nearly as may be, to reports from Ministers to the Board of Ministers, and all the provisions of this Order which relate to reports from the Council to the Governor shall relate, as nearly as may be, to reports from the Board of Ministers to the Governor. (d) If any Minister shall be prevented by illness or by absence from the island, or other sufficient cause, from exercising the functions of his office, the Governor may appoint a person to exercise temporarily the powers and functions of that Minister from among the Board of Ministers, excluding the Officers of State, or from among the persons who, immediately prior to the dissolution of the Council, constituted the Executive Committee of which that Minister was the Chairman. If the person so appointed shall be already a member of the Board of Ministers, he shall be entitled to a vote at meetings of the Board by reason of such appointment, in addition to the vote to which he is entitled by reason of his prior membership of the Board. Legislative Functions of the Council. 72. It shall be lawful for the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Council, to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the island: provided nevertheless, and it is hereby reserved to His Majesty, his heirs and successors, with the advice of his or their Privy Council, to make from time to time all such laws as may appear necessary for the peace, order and good government of the island as fully and effectually as if this Order had not been made. 73. A law may be enacted in accordance with this Order defining the privileges, immunities and powers to be held, enjoyed and exercised by the Council and the members thereof; provided that no such privileges, immunities or powers shall exceed those for the time being held, enjoyed and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or the members thereof. 74. No law made by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall take effect until the Governor
shall have assented thereto in the name and on behalf of His Majesty, and shall have signed the same in token of such assent, provided that if the Governor shall, in accordance with this Order, reserve any bill passed by the Council for the signification of His Majesty's pleasure thereon, such bill shall become law and take effect so soon as His Majesty shall have given his assent thereto, either by Order in Council or through the Secretary of State, and the Governor shall have signified such assent by Proclamation published in the Government Gazette.

75. When the Governor assents to a law, he shall, by the first convenient opportunity, transmit an authentic copy of the law, in duplicate, to the Secretary of State, and it shall be lawful for His Majesty at any time within 2 years after such copy shall have been received by the Secretary of State to notify to the Governor his disallowance of such law through the Secretary of State, and every law so disallowed shall become null and void from and after the day on which the Governor shall signify such disallowance by Proclamation in the Government Gazette. 76. When a bill passed by the Council is presented to the Governor for his assent, he shall, according to his discretion but subject to the provisions of this Order and of any Instructions addressed to him under His Majesty's Sign Manual and Signet or through the Secretary of State, declare that he assents thereto, or refuses his assent to the same, or that he reserves the same for the signification of His Majesty's pleasure. 77. The Governor may reserve any bill passed by the Council for the signification of His Majesty's pleasure thereon, and he shall so reserve any such bill by which any provision of this Order or of any other Order of His Majesty in Council is repealed or varied, or which is in any way repugnant to or inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Order or of any such other Order, except where by this Order or by any such other Order power is expressly given to the Council to make provision by law. When the Governor so reserves any bill he shall by the first convenient opportunity transmit an authentic copy in duplicate to the Secretary of State. 78. In assenting to any bill, the Governor may by order declare that the law shall be withheld from operation for a period not exceeding 6 months, and in such case, notwithstanding the provisions of article 74, such law shall not take effect until the expiration of the period for which the same shall have been withheld from operation by the Governor. 79. The Governor may return to the Council for further consideration any bill presented to him for his assent, or


for the ascertainment of His Majesty’s pleasure thereon, and may transmit therewith any amendments to the bill which he may recommend. 80. When the Governor is of opinion that any bill introduced or about to be introduced into the Council involves an important question of principle, he may at any time before the votes of members upon the third reading of the bill have been taken, communicate such opinion to the Council by message to the Speaker, and may require that the bill shall not be presented to him for his assent unless at any reading subsequent to that requirement it shall have been passed by a two-thirds majority of all the members of the Council, excluding the Officers of State and the Speaker or other presiding member. 81.-(1) If the Governor shall exercise in respect of any bill any of the powers conferred upon him by articles 78 and 80, he shall forthwith report his decision to the Secretary of State, and it shall be lawful for the Secretary of State to cancel or vary the Governor's decision in regard to the same. (2) The Governor shall communicate the directions of the Secretary of State to the Council, and thereupon such directions shall take effect. 82. As soon as possible after the commencement of each year the Governor shall cause a complete collection of all ordinances enacted during the preceding year to be published for general information.
Audit of Public Accounts.

83. There shall be an Auditor-General who shall be appointed by the Governor and shall hold office during good behaviour, provided that he shall be removed from office by the Governor upon an address praying for his removal presented to the Governor by the Council, provided also that he may be required by the Governor to retire from the public service on the ground of age or infirmity, whether of mind or body, in the like circumstances and subject to the same conditions as any other public officer in receipt of similar pensionable emoluments. 84. The Auditor-General shall be responsible for the audit and inspection of all public accounts of the Government. He shall see that in all matters relating to finance and accounts this Order and the laws of the island and all lawful directions of the Governor, or of the Council with the approval of the Governor, are strictly observed, and shall bring to the notice of the Governor and of the Council any failure in their observance. The Auditor-General and his deputies are at all times entitled to have access to all


books, records or returns relating to accounts, and all accounting officers shall give them every facility for inspecting such documents. 85. As soon as possible after the close of each financial year the Auditor-General shall prepare a report on the revenue and expenditure of the year, and in such report he shall deal with the collection of revenue, the state of the arrears, the manner in which the accounts of the island are kept, the sufficiency of existing checks against fraud, the nature and extent of the audit applied, and any special questions arising out of the accounts. He shall furnish this report to the Governor and to the Speaker for communication to the Council.

The Public Service.
86.-(1) The appointment, promotion, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers shall be vested in the Governor, subject to any Instructions given under His Majesty's Sign Manual and Signet or through the Secretary of State and, in so far as concerns the Auditor-General, to the provisions of article 83. (2) The Governor may, subject to such Instructions and provisions as aforesaid, and with the approval of the Secretary of State, delegate to such public officers having authority in or over Government departments as he shall think fit, subject to such conditions as he may prescribe, the appointment, promotion, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of officers who are not in receipt of annual pensionable emoluments exceeding such sum as may be specified in such Instructions. 87.-(1) No bill, motion, resolution or vote affecting any officer in the public service at the date of the commencement of this Order and involving any alteration in his salary, allowances, or conditions of service, or in the law, regulations or practice governing the grant of leave or passages, or the payment of pensions or gratuities, applicable to any such officer or his dependants or personal representatives at the date aforesaid shall be introduced into the Council without the sanction of the Governor; and no bill, motion, resolution, vote or other proposal involving any such alteration as aforesaid which, in the opinion of the Governor, shall be to the prejudice of any such officer shall take effect until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of State. (2) No bill, motion, resolution, vote or other proposal affecting any officer appointed after the commencement of this Order to any public office, appointment to which is subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, and involving any alteration which, in the opinion of the Governor, is to the prejudice of such officer, in the salary,



allowances, or conditions of service, or in the law, regulations, or practice governing the grant of leave or passages or the payment of pensions or gratuities, for the time being enjoyed by or applicable to any such officer or his dependants or personal representatives, shall take effect until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of State. (3) All pensions and gratuities which have been granted to officers who have retired from the public service before the date of the commencement of this Order or to the dependants of officers who have died before that date shall be governed by the law and regulations under which they were granted. (4) Any bill, motion, resolution, or vote the enactment or passage of which shall be necessary in order to preserve any rights or privileges which by this article may not be varied without the approval of the Secretary of State shall, to the extent required by the decision of the Secretary of State upon any such proposal, be deemed to be essential to give effect to the provisions of this Order within the meaning of article 22. 88.-(1) The Governor may, with the approval of the Secretary of State, make special regulations regarding the grant of pensions and gratuities on retirement to the following classes of public officers holding office at the date of 'the commencement of this Order, namely :(a) persons appointed, or selected for appointment, to any public office, appointment to which is subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, prior to the 17th day of July, 1928; (b) persons appointed to any such office after the 17th day of July, 1928, but prior to the 12th day of December, 1929; subject to the provisions of the following clauses of this article, such regulations shall provide that any person included in the first class mentioned above may retire at any time after the commencement of this Order and that any person included in the second class may retire at any time within 5 years after the commencement of this Order and on such retirement, in the case of an officer included in either of the two classes aforesaid, may be granted a pension or gratuity not less than that which he might have been granted in accordance with the minute on pensions in force at the date of the commencement of this Order if at the date of his retirement he had been compelled to retire by reason of the abolition of his office. (2) Before any public officer shall retire in the exercise of a right given by the regulations aforesaid he shall give to the Governor such notice of his intention to retire as the regulations shall prescribe.




(3) Save with the permission of the Governor, a public officer may not retire in the exercise of any right given by the regulations aforesaid if proceedings for his dismissal are being taken or are about to be taken, nor unless, if so required by the Governor, he shall satisfy the Governor that he is not incapacitated by infirmity either of mind or body for the discharge of his duties. (4) Pensions at the rate provided by the regulations aforesaid shall be granted only in cases of faithful and meritorious service and shall be subject to reduction, or may be refused, in the same circumstances and to the same extent as a pension which may be granted under the minute on pensions aforesaid. 89.-(l) There shall be a Public Services Commission to advise the Governor in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by article 86. The Chief Secretary shall be the Chairman and such other persons in the public service as the Governor shall appoint shall be members. In the absence of the Chief Secretary such other person as the Governor shall appoint shall act as Chairman of the Commission. (2) The Governor may at any time revoke any appointment made by him under this article. (3) The Governor may by regulation subject to the approval of the Secretary of State prescribe the duties of and the procedure to be followed by the Commission in the exercise of their duties and the number which shall form a quorum. 90. The Public Services Commission may require any public officer to attend end to give evidence before it touching any matter which it shall have under consideration and may require the production of any official documents relating to any such matter. 91.-(1) The Governor shall receive a salary of £8,000 a year, provided that during any period for which the Governor is absent from the island and the Government shall be administered by another officer in his stead (herein called " the Officer Administering the Government ") a part of the annual salary aforesaid, at the rate of £2,000 a year, shall be paid to that officer. (2) From and after the date of the first meeting of the Council after this Order shall come into operation the Chief Secretary shall receive a salary of £3,000 a year and the Legal Secretary and the Financial Secretary shall each receive a salary of £2,400 a year. (3) The salaries and payments provided by this article shall be charged upon the public revenue and other funds of the island. (4) In the assessment of any income tax which may be

payable under any written law no account shall be taken of the salaries or payments provided by this article for the Governor, or for the Officer Administering the Government, or of the annual value of any official residences assigned to either of them. Continuation or Transfer of Powers vested in certain Authorities by Local Law. 92. All powers, authorities, and functions which are or shall be vested in the Governor by any written law in force on the date when the first election of Executive Committees and the first appointment of Ministers in accordance with this Order shall be complete shall, so far as the same shall continue in existence and be capable of being exercised after the said date, remain vested in the Governor. 93. On and after the date when the first election of Executive Committees and the first appointment of Ministers in accordance with this Order shall be complete, all powers, authorities and functions which at the said date shall be vested by any written law in the Governor in Executive Council, howsoever the association of the said Council with the Governor may be described in any such law, shall, so far as the same shall continue in existence and be capable of being exercised after the said date, be vested in the Governor. 94. The Governor may, by order published in the Government Gazette, delegate to any Officer of State or to any Executive Committee or to the head of any Government department, subject to such conditions or limitations as he may prescribe, the exercise of any power, authority, or function to which articles 92 and 93 refer. 95. The Governor may, by order published in the Government Gazette, direct that any power, authority, or function which shall be vested in the Colonial Secretary, the Controller of Revenue, or any other public officer, by any written law in force on the date when the first election of Executive Committees and the first appointment of Ministers in accordance with this Order shall be complete, shall, so far as the same shall continue in existence and be capable of being exercised after that date, be vested, subject to such conditions or limitations as the Governor may prescribe, in any Officer of State, or in any Minister or Executive Committee, or in any public officer specified by the Governor in such order. 96. Nothing contained in any of the four immediately preceding articles, or in any order issued thereunder, shall affect the passing by the Council of any law relating to the vesting or the exercise of any of the powers to which those articles refer.



General. 97.-(1) If any difficulty arises as to the first establishment of the Council after the commencement of this Order, or otherwise in first giving effect to the provisions of this Order, the Governor, as occasion may require, may, by order published in the Government Gazette, do anything which appears to him necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. (2) The Governor may, by Proclamation in the Government Gazette, within 6 months after the commencement of this Order, and provided that His Majesty's approval be previously signified to him through the Secretary of State. vary, annul or add to any of the provisions of this Order in order to carry out the purposes of the same. 98. His Majesty hereby reserves to himself, his heirs and successors, power, with the advice of his or their Privy Council, to revoke, alter or amend this Order as to him or them shall seem fit. 

FirST

SCHEDULE.

I.-Home Affairs. Police. Prisons. Excise and Local Option. Functions of the Government Analyst. Religious Associations and Temporalities. Subjects of internal administration not otherwise allotted. II.-Agriculture and Lands. Lands Forests. Irrigation. Agriculture. Veterinary Services. Surveys and Meteorology. Co-operative Societies. III.-Local Administration. Local Government. Mines and Salt. Fisheries. Acquisition of land for public purposes. IV.-Health. Medical Services. Sanitary Services. Housing. V.-Labour, Industry, and Commerce. Labour. Industrial Welfare.
Commerce.

(Article 32.)

Functions of the Registrar-General. Poor Relief.




VI-Education. Education. Museums. Archmology. VII.-Communications and Works. Public Works. Railways. Electrical Undertakings. Posts and Telegraphs. Ports and Harbours. (Article 33.) I.-Chief Secretary. External Affairs. Defence. The Public Services.
SECOND SCHEDULE.

II.-Legal Secretary. The Administration of Justice. Drafting of Legislation. Legal Advice to Government. Criminal prosecutions and civil proceedings on behalf of the Crown. Elections to the State Council. Functions of the Public Trustee.

III.-Financial Secretary.
Finance. Supply. Stores and Printing. Establishments. Customs. Estate Duty and Stamps. Valuations on behalf of Government.


