SWE DEN

CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD
Editors ALBERT P. BLAUSTEIN & GISBERT H. FLANZ

SWE DEN
by GISBERT H. FLANZ & BJORN R. KORTI Z

Issued June 1975

Oceana Publications, Inc. Dobbs Ferry, New York

CONTENTS

CONSTITUTIONAL CHRONOLOGY THE CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

© Copyright 1975 by Oceana Publications, Inc. Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 76-141327 International Standard Book Number (ISBN): 0-379-00467-4

GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS (Frequently used in connection with the Constitutional reform in Sweden: 1954 to date). FU Forfattnings Utredningen - The first Constitutional Commission, 1954-1963

GB

r Grundlagsberedningen - The Second Constitutional Commission, 1966-1972 Regeringsformen - Instrument of Government Riksdagsordningen - Riksdag Act

RF RO

SFS - Svensk FOrfattningssamling - Swedish Code of Statutes SOU - Statens offentliga utredningar - The State's Public Reports TF Tryckfribetsförordningen - Freedom of the Press Act

Constitutional documents of Sweden
The Instrument of Government The Riksdag Act The Act of Succession The Freedom of the Press Act

Translated by Ulf K. Nordenson, Supreme Court Judge. The Instrument of Government, the Freedom of the Press Act (revised translation) and Sections IV and VII of the Introduction. Frank 0. Finney, B.A. The Riksdag Act, the Act of Succession (revised translation) and Sections I, II, III, V and VI of the Introduction.

THE INSTRUMENT OF GOVERNMENT Chapter 1. THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE CONSTITUTION Art. 1. All public power in Sweden emanates from the people. The Swedish democracy is founded on freedom of opinion and on universal and equal suffrage and shall be realized through a representative and parliamentary polity and through local selfgovernment. Public power shall be exercised under the laws. Art. 2. The Instrument of Government, the Act of Succession and the Freedom of the Press Act are the fundamental laws of the Realm of Sweden. Art. 3. The Riksdag is the principal representative of the people. The Riksdag enacts the laws, decides on taxes and determines how public funds shall be used. The Riksdag shall examine the government and administration of the country. Art. 4. The King is the Head of State. Art. 5. The Government rules the country. It is responsible to the Riksdag. Art. 6. In the Realm of Sweden there are primary municipalities and regional municipalities. The decision-making power in the municipalities is exercised by elected assemblies. The municipalities may impose taxes for the fulfilment of their tasks. Art. 7. For the administration of justice there are courts of law and for the public administration there are state and municipal administrative authorities. Art. 8. In the exercise of their functions the courts and administra1

tive authorities shall maintain objectivity and impartiality. They may not without legal grounds treat persons differently by reason of their personal conditions such as faith, opinions, race, skin-colour, origin, sex, age, nationality, language, social status, or financial circumstances.

Chapter 2. FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND RIGHTS Art. 1. Every citizen shall in relation to the community be guaranteed 1. the freedom of expression and the freedom of the press: the freedom to communicate information and express opinions either orally, in writing, in pictorial representations, or in any other way, 2. the right to information: the right to obtain and receive information, 3. the freedom of assembly: the freedom to arrange and to participate in meetings, 4. the right to demonstration: the right to express opinions on public grounds, either individually or in groups, 5. the freedom of association: the freedom to join with others in unions, 6. the freedom of religion: the freedom to join with others in religious communities and to practice one's religion, 7. the freedom of movement: the freedom to move within the Realm and to leave the Realm. Art. 2. Every citizen shall be protected against any public authority compelling him to belong to any association or religious community or to make known his opinions. Art. 3. Every citizen shall be protected against being subjected by any public authority to bodily search or other forced encroachment on his body, to any search of his home, or to any encroachment on his correspondence or on his postal or tele-communications, or to eaves-dropping. Art. 4. With regard to the freedom of the press and the right to have access to public documents the Freedom of the Press Act shall apply. Other provisions elaborating more in detail the freedoms and rights and the protection referred to in Articles 1-3 shall be enactdihmrpsbedinChat8. 2

Art. 5. Any trade union and any employer or association of employers shall have the right to take strike or lock-out actions or any similar measures, except as otherwise provided by law or ensuing from a contract.

Chapter 3. THE RIKSDAG Art. 1. The Riksdag shall be constituted through free and direct elections with use of secret ballots. The Riksdag consists of one chamber comprised of three hundred and forty-nine members. The members shall have substitutes. Art. 2. The right to vote in the elections for the Riksdag is granted to every Swedish national who is resident in Sweden. Provision! regarding the suffrage of Swedish nationals not having their residence in Sweden shall be laid down by law. A person who has not reached the age of eighteen years on or before the day of the elections or who has been declared by court order to be under legal disability shall not have the right to vote. Any question of whether there is a right to vote under the preceding paragraph shall be determined on the basis of an electoral register established before the elections. Art. 3. Ordinary elections for the Riksdag shall be held every third year. – Art. 4. The Government may order extra elections to be held between ordinary elections. Extra elections shall be held within three months following such order. After elections for the Riksdag have been held the Government may not issue an order for extra elections until three months have elapsed from the first meeting of the newly-elected Riksdag. Nor may the Government issue an order for extra elections while the members of the Government, after having all been discharged, retain their posts pending a new Government taking office. Provisions regarding extra elections in a particular case are set forth in Article 3 of Chapter 6. Art. 5. A newly-elected Riksdag shall assemble on the fifteenth day after the day of the elections but in no case earlier than on the fourth day after the results of the elections have been announced. Each election is valid for the time from the day on which the newly-elected Riksdag has assembled until the next thereafter

3

elected Riksdag is assembled. The said time is the electoral period of the Riksdag. Art. 6. For the purpose of elections for the Riksdag the Realm is divided into constituencies. The seats of the Riksdag consist of three hundred and ten permanent constituency seats and thirty-nine adjustment seats. The permanent constituency seats shall be distributed among the constituencies on the basis of a calculation of the ratio between the number of those entitled to vote in each constituency and the total number in the entire Realm of those entitled to vote. This distribution shall be fixed for three years at a time. Art. 7. The seats shall be distributed among parties. Every association or group of voters which appears in the elections under a specified designation shall be considered a party. Only a party which has received at least four per cent of the votes cast in the entire Realm shall be entitled to participate in the distribution of the seats. However, a party which has received fewer votes shall participate in the distribution of the permanent constituency seats in any constituency where the party has received at least twelve per cent of the votes cast. Art. 8. The permanent constituency seats shall for each constituency be distributed proportionally among the parties on the basis of the results of the elections in that constituency. The adjustment seats shall be distributed among the parties in such a manner that the distribution of all seats in the Riksdag, with the exception of those permanent constituency seats which have been allotted to a party with less than four per cent of the votes cast, is proportional to the total number of votes cast in the entire Realm for the respective participating parties. If, through the distribution of the permanent constituency seats, a party has obtained more seats than correspond to the proportional representation for that party in the Riksdag, then the party and the permanent constituency seats which it has obtained shall be disregarded in the distribution of the adjustment seats. After the adjustment seats have been distributed among the parties, they shall be allocated to constituencies. In the distribution of the seats among the parties the odd number method shall be used and the first divisor shall be adjusted to 1.4. Art. 9. For each seat that a party has obtained there shall be appointed one member of the Riksdag and one substitute for him. 4

Art. 10. Only a person who fulfils the requirements for the right to vote and who is legally competent can be a member of the Riksdag or a substitute for such member. Art. 11. Appeals against elections for the Riksdag may be lodged with an Election Review Committee appointed by the Riksdag. Any person who has been elected member of the Riksdag shall exercise his function notwithstanding any such appeal having been lodged. If the results of the elections are changed, any new member shall take his seat as soon as the change has been announced. What has now been said about a member shall also apply to any substitute. The Election Review Committee consists of a chairman, who shall be or have been a permanent judge and who must not be a member of the Riksdag, and six other members. The members shall be elected after each ordinary elections as soon as the results of the elections have become final and shall serve until new elections for the Committee have been held. There shall be no right to appeal against any decision of the Committee. Art. 12. Further provisions regarding the subjects dealt with in Articles 2 to 11 and regarding the appointment of substitutes for the members of the Riksdag shall be laid down in the Riksdag Act or other law.

Chapter 4. THE BUSINESS OF THE RIKSDAG Art. 1. The Riksdag shall assemble for session every year. Session shall be held in Stockholm, unless the Riksdag or the Speaker otherwise decides out of consideration for the security or freedom of the Riksdag. Art. 2. The Riksdag shall from among its members and for each electoral period designate a Speaker as well as one First, one Second and one Third Vice Speaker. Art. 3. The Government and each member of the Riksdag may, in accordance with provisions to be laid down in the Riksdag Act, introduce propositions on any topic which is liable to decisionmaking by the Riksdag, unless otherwise provided in the present Instrument of Government. The Riksdag, pursuant to provisions to be laid down in the Riks5

dag Act, shall elect committees from among its members; among them one Standing Committee on the Constitution, one Standing Committee on Finance and one Standing Committee on Taxation. Any matter raised by the Government or by a member of the Riksdag shall be considered by a committee before being finally decided upon, unless otherwise provided in the present Instrument of Government. Art. 4. When a matter shall be decided upon in the Chamber, each member of the Riksdag and each member of the Government may express his opinions in accordance with provisions to be laid down in the Riksdag Act. Provisions regarding grounds for disqualification shall be laid down in the Riksdag Act. Art. 5. In case of voting in the Riksdag the opinion in which more than half of those participating in the vote have concurred shall be the decision of the Riksdag, unless otherwise specifically provided in the present Instrument of Government, or, as regards matters relating to the procedure in the Riksdag, in a main provision of the Riksdag Act. Provisions regarding the procedure to be followed in case the votes are equal shall be laid down in the Riksdag Act. Art. 6. Any member of the Riksdag and any substitute for such member may fulfil his mission as member notwithstanding any official duty or other similar obligation which may be incumbent upon him. Art. 7. No member of the Riksdag or substitute for such member may resign from his mission without the consent of the Riksdag. When there are reasons for it the Election Review Committee shall, on its own initiative, examine whether a particular member or substitute is competent pursuant to the provisions of Article 10 of Chapter 3. Any person who is declared incompetent is thereby discharged from his mission. A member or a substitute may in cases other than that referred to in the preceding paragraph be discharged from his mission only if, through a criminal act, he has proved to be manifestly unfit for the mission. Any decision to this effect shall be taken by a court. Art. 8. No person or public authority may bring an action against any person who fulfils or has fulfilled a mission as member of the Riksdag, or deprive him of his liberty, or prevent him from travelling within the country, on account of his statements or acts in the fulfilment of his mission, unless the Riksdag has given its consent 6

by a decision in which not less than five-sixths of those present and voting have concurred. If, in any other case, a member of the Riksdag is suspected of having committed a criminal act, the relevant provisions of law relating to capture, detention, or arrest are applicable only if he admits himself to be guilty or has been caught in the very act of commission, or if the minimum penalty for the relevant crime is not less than imprisonment for two years. Art. 9. During the time a member of the Riksdag is the Speaker of the Riksdag or is a member of the Government, his mission as member of the Riksdag shall be fulfilled by a substitute. The Riksdag may prescribe in the Riksdag Act that a substitute shall replace a member of the Riksdag while the latter is on leave of absence. The provisions of Article 6 and the first paragraph of Article 8 of this Chapter regarding protection with respect to the fulfilment of the mission as member of the Riksdag shall likewise apply to the Speaker and his mission. The provisions relating to a member of the Riksdag shall apply to any substitute who fulfils a mission as a member. Art. 10. Additional provisions regarding the business of the Riksdag shall be laid down in the Riksdag Act.

Chapter 5. THE HEAD OF STATE Art. 1. The Head of State shall be kept informed by the Prime Minister about the affairs of the Realm. Whenever necessary the Government shall convene in Council under the chairmanship of the Head of State. Art. 2. Only a person who is a Swedish citizen and has reached the age of twenty-five years may serve as Head of State. He may not at the same time be a member of the Government or fulfil a mission as Speaker or member of the Riksdag. The Head of State shall consult the prime minister before he travels abroad. Art. 3. it by reason of illness, journey abroad, or any other cause the King is prevented from fulfilling his duties, then in accordance with the applicable order of succession such member of the Royal family who is not prevented therefrom shall assume office as Temporary Regent in order to fulfil the duties of the Head of State. 7

Art. 4. Should the Royal family become extinct, the Riksdag shall designate a Regent to fulfil the duties of the Head of State pending further action. At the same time the Riksdag shall designate a Deputy Regent. The preceding provision shall likewise apply if the King dies or abdicates and the successor to the throne has not yet reached the age of twenty-five years. Art. 5. If for a period of six months the King has continuously been prevented from fulfilling his duties or has failed to fulfil them, the Government shall report to the Riksdag. The Riksdag shall decide whether the King shall be considered to have abdicated. Art. 6. The Riksdag may designate a person to serve, upon appointment by the Government, as a Temporary Regent when no person competent under Articles 3 or 4 can serve. The Speaker, or, in case of his being prevented from attending, a Vice Speaker shall, upon appointment by the Government, serve as Temporary Regent when no other competent person can serve. Art. 7. The King cannot be prosecuted on account of his acts or omissions. A Regent cannot be prosecuted on account of his acts or omissions as Head of State. Chapter 6. THE GOVERNMENT Art. 1. The Government consists of the Prime Minister and other cabinet ministers. The Prime Minister shall be designated in the manner prescribed in Articles 2 to 4. The Prime Minister appoints the other ministers. Art. 2. When a Prime Minister is to be designated the Speaker shall convene representatives of each party group within the Riksdag for consultation. The Speaker shall confer with the Vice Speakers and shall then submit a proposal to the Riksdag. The Riksdag shall proceed to vote on the proposal, not later than on the fourth day thereafter, without preparation within any committee. If more than half of the members of the Riksdag vote against the proposal, it is thereby rejected. In any other case it is approved. Art. 3. If the Riksdag rejects the proposal of the Speaker the procedure as prescribed in Article 2 shall be resumed. If the Riksdag

8

has rejected the proposal of the Speaker four times the procedure for designating the Prime Minister shall be discontinued and resumed only after elections for the Riksdag have been held. Unless ordinary elections are in any case to be held within three months, extra elections shall be held within the same period of time. Art. 4. When the Riksdag has approved a proposal for a new Prime Minister, the latter shall as soon as possible inform the Riksdag of the ministers appointed by him. Change of Government shall take place thereafter at a special Council meeting before the Head of State or, if he is prevented from being present, before the Speaker. The Speaker shall always be summoned to such a meeting. The Speaker shall on behalf of the Riksdag issue letters of appointment for the Prime Minister. Art. 5. If the Riksdag declares that the Prime Minister or any other minister does not enjoy the confidence of the Riksdag, then the Speaker shall discharge that minister. However, when the Government is in a position to order that extra elections for the Riksdag shall be held, no decision on discharge shall be made if the Government issues an order for extra elections within one week from the declaration of no confidence. Art. 6. A minister shall be discharged if he so requests, the Prime Minister by the Speaker, and any other minister by the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister may discharge another minister also in other cases. Art. 7. If the Prime Minister resigns or dies, the Speaker shall discharge the other ministers. Art. 8. If all members of the Government have been discharged they shall retain their posts until a new Government has taken office. If any minister other than the Prime Minister has been discharged on his own request he shall retain his post until a successor has taken office, if the Prime Minister so requests. Art. 9. Only a person who has been a Swedish national for not less than ten years may be a cabinet minister. A minister may not perform any public or private service. Nor may he assume any mission or perform any activity which is liable to impair public confidence in him. Art. 10. Whenever the Speaker is prevented from being present a 9

Vice Speaker shall assume the duties which are under the present Chapter incumbent upon the Speaker. Chapter 7. THE BUSINESS OF THE GOVERNMENT
Art. 1. For the preparation of matters to be dealt with by the

Government there shall be a Cabinet Office. This Office shall comprise ministries for different fields of activity. The Government shall distribute the matters among the ministries. The Prime Minister shall from among the ministers appoint heads of the respective ministries.
Art. 2. In preparation of Government matters the authorities con-

cerned shall be consulted with a view to obtaining the necessary information and opinions. To the extent necessary associations and private subjects shall be given an opportunity to express their views.
Art. 3. Government matters shall be decided upon at Government

meetings. Government matters concerning the carrying into effect within the defence forces of statutes or particular Government decisions may, however, to the extent determined by law, under the supervision of the Prime Minister be decided upon by the head of the ministry to which such matters belong.
Art. 4. The Prime Minister shall convene the other ministers to

Government meetings and shall preside at such meetings. Not less than five ministers shall participate in any Government meeting.
Art. 5. The head of a ministry shall submit reports at Government

meetings on matters belonging to his ministry. The Prime Minister may, however, order that reports on matters or any group of matters belonging to a particular ministry shall be submitted by a minister other than the head of that ministry.
Art. 6. Minutes shall be kept of Government meetings. Any dissi-

dence shall be recorded in the minutes. Art. 7. Laws and other statutes, propositions to be submitted to the Riksdag, and any other dispatches of Government decisions shall in order to be effective be signed on behalf of the Government by the Prime Minister or another minister. The Government may, however, by way of decrees prescribe that in particular cases a civil servant may sign a dispatch.
10

Art. 8. The Prime Minister may designate one of the other ministers

to fulfil his duties as deputy in case the Prime Minister is prevented from fulfilling them. If no deputy has been designated by the Prime Minister, or if the deputy is also prevented from fulfilling the duties of the Prime Minister, these duties shall be assumed by that minister among those in office who has been a minister for the longest period of time. Where two or more ministers have been ministers for the same period of time the oldest of them shall have priority.

Chapter 8. LAWS AND OTHER REGULATIONS
Art. 1. No law or other regulation may imply that a sentence for

capital punishment can be pronounced. No law or other regulation may imply that it shall be possible to expel a Swedish national from Sweden or otherwise prevent a Swedish national from returning to Sweden, or that it shall be possible to deprive a Swedish national who is resident in Sweden of his citizenship except in a case where he is or at the same time becomes a national of another state. No law or other regulation may imply that it shall be possible to impose a penalty or other penal sanction on account of an act which was not subject to any penal sanction at the time it was committed, or to impose a more severe penal sanction on account of the act than that which was prescribed at that time. What has thus been provided with respect to penal sanctions shall likewise apply with respect to confiscation or any other special legal effects attached to criminal acts. Any private subject shall be guaranteed the right to obtain compensation, according to principles to be determined by law, in case his property is requisitioned by way of expropriation or other such means of disposition. Art. 2. Provisions relating to the personal status of private subjects or to their personal and economic interrelationships shall be laid down by law. Such provisions are, inter alia: 1. provisions concerning Swedish citizenship, 2. provisions concerning the right to a family name, or concerning marriage and parenthood, heritage and testaments, or other family affairs, 3. provisions concerning the right to real estate and movable property, concerning contracts, or concerning companies, associations, communities and foundations.
4-740488

11

Art. 3. Provisions concerning the relations between private subjects and the community which concern obligations incumbent upon private subjects or which otherwise interfere in the personal or economic affairs of private subjects shall be laid down by law. Such provisions are, inter alia: provisions which restrict the freedoms or rights, or such other protection which is granted Swedish nationals under Articles 1 to 3 of Chapter 2, provisions regarding criminal acts and the legal consequences of such acts, provisions regarding taxes payable to the State, and provisions regarding requisition and other such disposition. Art. 4. Provisions concerning consultative referendum in the entire Realm shall be laid down by law. Art. 5. Principles governing the division of the Realm into municipalities, and principles governing the organisation and workingmethods of the municipalities and the municipal taxation shall be laid down by law. Provisions governing the powers of the municipalities in other respects and governing their duties shall likewise be laid down by law. Art. 6. During such time that the Riksdag is not in session the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation may, upon authorization by a law regarding taxes other than income taxes, capital taxes, succession or gift taxes, on proposition by the Government, determine the tax rates or decide that taxes referred to in such law shall commence or cease to be levied. Such authorization may include the right to distinguish between different kinds of activities and different parts of the Realm. The Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation shall exercise their decision-making right in joint meeting. Any decision shall be made on behalf of the Riksdag by law. Any law decided by the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation under the preceding paragraph shall be submitted to the Riksdag by the Government within one month from the beginning of the next Riksdag session. The Riksdag shall examine the law and make its decision within one month thereafter. Art. 7. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3 or 5 the Government may, with authorization by law, issue regulations by way of decrees concerning matters other than taxes, provided that such regulations relate to any of the following issues: 1. protection of life, personal security, or health, 2. foreigners' residence or sojourn in the Realm, 12

3. the import or export of goods, money, or any other assets, manufacturing, communications, granting of credits, or economic activities, 4. game-shooting, fishing, or preservation of nature and environment, 5. traffic or order on public grounds, 6. teaching and education. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 the Government may, upon authorization by law, issue regulations by way of decrees prohibiting revelation of such matters about which a person has acquired knowledge during public service or in the fulfilment of public duties. An authorization such as is referred to in the present Article shall not include the right to issue regulations which in any other respects than those indicated in the second paragraph of this Article restrict any of the freedoms or rights, or such other protection which is granted Swedish nationals under Articles 1 to 3 of Chapter 2. Nor shall such authorization include the right to issue regulations providing for any legal consequence of a criminal act other than fines. The Riksdag may, in a law by which an authorization is given by virtue of the present article, provide also for legal consequences other than fines in respect of violations of regulations issued by the Government by virtue of such authorization. Art. 8. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 2, 3, or 5, the Government may, upon authorization by law, issue regulations by way of decrees regarding the granting of respites for the fulfilment of duties. Art. 9. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, the Government may, upon authorization by law, issue regulations by way of decrees concerning custom duties on the importation of goods. The Government or any municipality may, upon authorization by the Riksdag, issue such regulations concerning charges or fees which owing to Article 3 shall otherwise be issued by the Riksdag. Art. 10. In any matter referred to in the first paragraph of Article 7 or in Article 9, the Government may, upon authorization by law, prescribe by way of decrees that one or more provisions of such law shall commence or cease to be applied. This shall apply even if the relevant provision restricts any of the freedoms, or rights, or such other protection which is granted Swedish nationals under Articles 1 to 3 of Chapter 2.

13

Art. 11. Where under the present Instrument of Government the Riksdag authorizes the Government to issue regulations in a particular matter, the Riksdag may in such context authorize the Government to confer upon an administrative authority or a municipality the task of issuing regulations in such matter. In a case such as now referred to, the Riksdag may also commission an administrative authority under the Riksdag to issue such regulations.
Art. 12. Regulations issued by the Government by virtue of such

authorization as is referred to in the present Instrument of Government shall be submitted to the Riksdag for examination and approval if the Riksdag so decides.
Art. 13. In addition to that which follows from Articles 7 to 10 the

Government may issue, by way of decrees, 1. regulations regarding the enforcement of law, 2. regulations which are not, under the fundamental laws, to be issued by the Riksdag. The Government may not by virtue of the preceding paragraph issue any regulations which concern the Riksdag or its authorities. Nor may the Government by virtue of sub-paragraph 2 of the preceding paragraph issue regulations which concern municipal taxes. The Government may, by such decrees as are referred to in the first paragraph of this Article, confer upon a subordinate authority the task of issuing regulations in the relevant matter.
Art. 14. The power conferred on the Government to issue regula-

tions in a particular matter shall not prevent the Riksdag from issuing, by way of law, regulations in the same matter.
Art. 15. Any fundamental law shall be adopted by way of two

decisions of identical wording. The second decision may not be taken until elections for the Riksdag have been held in the entire Realm after the first decision and the newly-elected Riksdag has convened. The Riksdag may not as pending adopt any proposition for a fundamental law which is incompatible with any other pending proposition for such law, unless at the same time the Riksdag rejects the proposition first adopted.
Art. 16. The Riksdag Act shall be adopted in the same manner as

the fundamental laws. It may also be adopted by only one decision, provided that it has been agreed upon by not less than three-fourths of those present and voting and by more than half the members of the Riksdag. However, any supplementary provision of the Riksdag 14

Act shall be adopted in the same manner as ordinary laws. Art. 17. No law shall be amended or repealed otherwise than by law. With respect to any amendment or abrogation of any fundamental law Articles 15 and 16 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Art. 18. For the purpose of submitting observations and opinions to the Government on proposed bills there shall be a Law Council composed of Justices of the Supreme Court and of the Supreme Administrative Court. Any Standing Committee of the Riksdag may likewise obtain a statement of the Law Council in accordance with provisions to be set forth in the Riksdag Act. Further provisions concerning the Law Council shall be set forth by law. Art. 19. Any adopted act of law shall be promulgated by the Government without delay. An act containing such provisions concerning the Riksdag or its authorities which shall not be laid down in a fundamental law may, however, be promulgated by the Riksdag. Laws and decrees shall be made known to the public as soon as possible.

Chapter 9. FINANCIAL POWER Art. 1. Provisions governing the right to decide on taxes and charges or fees due the State are set forth in Chapter 8. Art. 2. The funds of the State may not be used in any way other than determined by the Riksdag. The Riksdag shall determine the use of such funds for different purposes by way of adopting a budget in accordance with Articles 3 to 5. The Riksdag may, however, decide that funds are to be utilized in another manner. Art. 3. The Riksdag shall adopt a budget for the next following fiscal year or, if special reasons so warrant, for another budget period. The Riksdag shall in that context determine the amounts to which the revenues of the State shall be estimated and shall grant appropriations for specified purposes. The decisions in this respect shall be incorporated in a State budget. The Riksdag may decide that a particular appropriation within the State budget shall be granted for a period other than the budget period. 15

When adopting a budget under the present article the Riksdag shall take into account the need of funds for the defence of the Realm in times of war, danger of war, or other exceptional circumstances.

Art. 4. If the budget cannot be finally adopted in accordance with
Article 3 before the commencement of the budget period, the Riksdag, or, if the Riksdag is not in session, the Committee on Finance, shall to the extent necessary decide on appropriations for the time until the budget for the relevant period is adopted.

Art. 5. For the current fiscal year the Riksdag may in a supplementary budget make new estimates of the revenues of the State, change appropriations granted, and grant new appropriations.

Art. 6. The Government shall submit proposals for a State budget
to the Riksdag.

Art. 7. The Riksdag may, in connection with the consideration and
adoption of the budget or otherwise, determine guidelines for a particular state activity for a period longer than that for which appropriations for the activity have been granted.

Art. 8. The funds and other assets of the State shall be at the
Government's disposal. This provision shall not, however, apply to assets which are intended for the Riksdag or its authorities or which have by law been put under special administration.

Art. 9. The Riksdag shall to the extent necessary determine the
principles for the administration and disposition of the property of the State. The Riksdag may in such context prescribe that measures of a particular nature may not be taken without the permission of the Riksdag.

Art. 10. The Government may not without authorization of the
Riksdag take any loans or otherwise assume any financial obligations on behalf of the State. Under the Riksdag there shall be an authority commissioned with the task of taking and administering, in accordance with the Riksdag's authorization, loans granted to the State. Further provisions in this respect shall be set forth by law.

Art. 11. A Delegation for Salaries established within the Riksdag
shall in negotiable matters concerning terms of employment, which 16

are to be applied to employees of the State or which otherwise are subject to examination and approval by the Riksdag, confer with such member of the Government as the Government designates. However, as regards employees of the Riksdag or its authorities, the Delegation shall instead confer with a person designated by the Riksdag. The Delegation for Salaries may on behalf of the Riksdag approve agreements concerning such matters, or, if the relevant matter has been exempted from settlement by negotiation, approve proposals for its regulation. The foregoing provisions shall not apply if in a particular case the Riksdag has decided otherwise. Further provisions concerning the composition of the Delegation for Salaries shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act. Art. 12. The Bank of Sweden is an authority under the Riksdag. The Bank of Sweden shall be administered by a Board of Governors composed of seven delegates. One of these delegates and his deputy shall be appointed by the Government for a period of three years at a time. The other six delegates shall be elected by the Riksdag. The delegate appointed by the Government shall be president of the Board. He may not carry out any commission or hold any position within the management of the Bank of Sweden. Provisions concerning the election of the delegates by the Riksdag, the management of the Bank of Sweden in other respects, and concerning the activities of the Bank shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act and other laws. If the Riksdag refuses to grant a delegate discharge from liability he shall thereby be removed from his commission. The Government may rescind the appointment of the president or of his deputy. Art. 13. The Bank of Sweden alone shall have the right to issue banknotes. Further provisions concerning the monetary and payments systems shall be laid down by law.

Chapter 10. RELATIONS TO OTHER STATES Art. 1. An agreement with another state or with an international organisation shall be concluded by the Government. Art. 2. The Government may not conclude any international agreement binding upon the Realm without the Riksdag having approved thereof, if the agreement presupposes any amendment or abrogation of any law or the enactment of new law, nor if it otherwise concerns a matter in which the Riksdag shall decide. 17

If in such a case as is referred to in the preceding paragraph a special procedure has been prescribed for the requisite decision of the Riksdag, the same procedure shall be followed in connection with the approval of the agreement. Nor may the Government in any case other than such as is referred to in the first paragraph of this Article conclude any international agreement binding upon the Realm without the Riksdag having approved thereof, if the agreement is of major importance. The Government may, however, omit obtaining the Riksdag's approval of the agreement if the interest of the Realm so requires. In such a case the Government shall instead confer with the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council before the agreement is concluded. Art. 3. The Government may commission an administrative authority with the task of concluding international agreements in matters in which such agreements do not require any action on the part of the Riksdag or of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council. Art. 4. The provisions of Articles 1 to 3 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the commitment in any form other than an agreement to an international obligation incumbent upon the Realm and to any denunciation of an international agreement or obligation.
Art. 5. The right to make decisions which under the present Instrument of Government devolves on the Riksdag, on the Government, or on any other organ referred to in the Instrument and which does not relate to the enactment, amendment, or abrogation of a fundamental law may to a limited extent be entrusted to an international organisation for peaceful co-operation of which Sweden is or is to become a member or to an International Tribunal. In any such matter the Riksdag shall decide in the manner prescribed for the enactment of fundamental laws or, if a decision under such procedure cannot be abided, by way of a decision agreed upon by not less than five-sixths of those present and voting and by not less than three-fourths of the Riksdag members. Any judicial or administrative function which does not under the present Instrument of Government devolve on the Riksdag, on the Government, or on any other organ referred to in the Instrument, may be entrusted to another state, to an international organisation, or to a foreign or international institution or community, if the Riksdag so determines by a decision in which not less than threefourths of those present and voting have concurred, or a decision taken in the manner prescribed for the enactment of fundamental laws.

18

Art. 6. The Government shall continuously keep the Foreign

Affairs Advisory Council informed of those matters relating to foreign affairs which may be of importance to the Realm, and shall confer with the Council in these matters as often as is necessary. In all foreign affairs of major importance, the Government shall confer with the Council before making its decision, if this is possible.
Art. 7. The Foreign Affairs Advisory Council consists of the Speaker and nine other members whom the Riksdag shall elect from among its members. Further provisions concerning the composition of the Council shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act. The Foreing Affairs Advisory Council shall be convened by the Government. The Government shall be under an obligation to convene the Council if not less than four of its members request that deliberations be held on a particular matter. Meetings of the Council shall be presided over by the Head of State or, if he is prevented from being present, the Prime Minister. Any member of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council and any person who is otherwise connected with the Council shall be careful in communicating to other persons what he has learnt in such capacity. The President of the Council may decide on an unconditional duty of secrecy. Art. 8. The head of the ministry to which matters of foreign affairs

belong shall be kept informed whenever a question of importance for the relations to a foreign state or to an international organisation arises within another state authority.
Art. 9. The Government may engage the defence forces of the

Realm, or part of them, in battle for the purpose of countering an armed attack against the Realm. Swedish armed forces may otherwise be engaged in battle or be sent to another country only if 1. the Riksdag has assented thereto, 2. it is admitted in law indicating the prerequisites for such action, 3. a duty to take such action follows from an international agreement or obligation which has been approved by the Riksdag. A declaration that the Realm is at war may not be made without the consent of the Riksdag, except in case of an armed attack against the Realm. The Government may authorize the defence forces to use violence in accordance with international law and custom for the purpose of preventing any invasion of the territory of the Realm in times of peace or during a war between foreign states. 19

Chapter 11. JUDICIAL AN) GENERAL ADMINISTRATION Art. 1. The Supreme Court is the highest court of general jurisdiction, and the Supreme Administrative Court is the highest administrative court. The right to have a case tried by the Supreme Court or by the Supreme Administrative Court may be restricted by law. A person may serve as member of the Supreme Court or the Supreme Administrative Court only if such person has been appointed permanent justice of that court. A court other than the Supreme Court or the Supreme Administrative Court shall be instituted by virtue of law. No court may be instituted for an act already committed, nor for a particular dispute or otherwise for a particular case. In any such court as is referred to in the second paragraph of this Article there shall be permanent judges. However, with respect to courts which have been instituted for the hearing of a specified group or specified groups of cases exceptions from this rule may be made by law. Art. 2. No authority, nor the Riksdag may determine how a court shall adjudicate a particular case or how a court shall in other respects apply a rule of law in a particular case. Art. 3. A legal dispute between private subjects may not, except by virtue of law, be settled by an authority other than a court. If an authority other than a court has deprived a person of his liberty on account of a criminal act or a suspicion of such act, such person shall be entitled to have the matter tried by a court without undue delay. This provision shall likewise apply if a Swedish national for any other reason than mentioned above has been coercively taken into custody. In the last-mentioned case an examination by a board shall rank equally with the trial of a court, provided that the composition of the board is governed by rules of law and the chairman of the board shall be or shall have been a permanent judge. Art. 4. Provisions concerning the functions of the courts as to the administration of justice, the principal features of the organisation of the courts, and concerning the legal proceedings shall be laid down by law. Art. 5. A person appointed permanent judge may be removed from his post only 1. if through a criminal act or through gross or reiterated 20

neglect of his official duties he has shown himself manifestly unfit to hold the position, 2. if he has reached the applicable age of retirement or is otherwise under a legal obligation to retire on a pension. If a permanent judge has been removed from his post through a decision made by an authority other than a court he shall be entitled to call for a court to examine the decision. This provision shall likewise apply to any decision by which a permanent judge has been suspended from exercising his official functions, or has been ordered to undergo a medical examination. If it is called for by organizational reasons, any person appointed a permanent judge may be transferred to any other judicial office of equal rank. Art. 6. The Attorney General, the Chief Public Prosecutor, the central administrative boards, and the provincial governments are subordinate to the Government. Any other administrative authority of the State shall be subordinate to the Government, unless such authority under the present Instrument of Government or under the terms of any other law is an authority under the Riksdag. Administrative functions may be conferred upon a municipality. Administrative functions may be entrusted to a company, an association, a community, or a foundation. If such function involves the exercise of public authority, it shall be entrusted to such body by law. Art. 7. No public authority, nor the Riksdag, nor the decisionmaking body of a municipality may determine how an administrative authority shall make its decision in a particular case concerning the exercise of public authority against a private subject or against a municipality, or concerning the application of law.
Art. 8.

No judicial or administrative function may be carried out by the Riksdag to any further extent than is provided for by a fundamental law or the Riksdag Act. Appointments to any post in a court or in an administrative authority subordinate to the Government shall be made by the Government or by an authority designated by the Government. When making appointments to posts within the State administration attention shall be paid only to objective factors such as service merits and competence. Only a Swedish national may hold or exercise the functions of a judicial office, an office directly subordinate to the Government, a 21
Art. 9.

post or commission as head of an authority directly subordinate to the Riksdag or to the Government or as member of such authority or its board, a post in the Cabinet Office nearest under a minister, or a post as a Swedish envoy. Also in other cases only a Swedish national may hold an office or carry out a commission, if appointments to such office or commission are to be made by elections by the Riksdag. In other cases Swedish nationality may be required for the right to hold or perform functions in an office or a mission for the State or for a municipality only if prescribed by law or on conditions prescribed by law. Art. 10. Fundamental provisions governing the legal status of civil servants in other respects than those referred to in the present Instrument of Government shall be set forth by law. Art. 11. Legal review of a closed case and reopening of a case upon non-observance of a time-limit shall be granted by the Supreme Administrative Court when the issue concerns a matter in respect of which the Government, an administrative court, or an administrative authority is the highest instance, and in any other case by the Supreme Court. Further provisions in this regard may be set forth by law. Art. 12. The Government may grant exceptions from any provision of a decree, or from a provision issued by virtue of a decision by the Government, unless the contrary follows from an act of law or from a decision on a budget appropriation. Art. 13. The Government may by granting pardon remit or reduce any criminal sanction or other legal consequence of a criminal act, and may remit or reduce any other similar encroachment concerning a private subject's person or property, made by a public authority. Where exceptional reasons so warrant, the Government may order that no further measures for the purpose of investigating or prosecuting a criminal act shall be taken.

Chapter 12. POWER OF CONTROL Art. 1. The Committee on the Constitution shall examine the manner in which the ministers have performed their duties and the handling of Government matters. The Committee is entitled for this purpose to have access to the records of the decisions made in Government matters and to all documents pertaining to such mat22

ters. Any other Riksdag Committee and any member of the Riksdag shall be entitled to raise, with the Committee on the Constitution, in writing any issue concerning the performance of the duties of a minister or concerning the handling of a Government matter. Art. 2. It shall be incumbent upon the Committee on the Constitution to communicate to the Riksdag, whenever reasons so warrant but at least once a year, any such observations as the Committee, in connection with its examination, has found to be worthy of attention. The Riksdag may, on account of any such observation, make presentations to the Government. Art. 3. A person who is or who has been a minister may be held responsible for a criminal act committed in the performance of his official duties only if he has thereby grossly neglected his duties. Such impeachment shall be decided upon by the Committee on the Constitution and the case shall be tried by the Supreme Court. Art. 4. The Riksdag may declare that a particular minister does not enjoy the confidence of the Riksdag. Such declaration of no confidence requires that more than half of the Riksdag members have concurred therein. A motion for a declaration of no confidence shall be taken up for consideration only if it is introduced by not less than one-tenth of the Riksdag members. It shall not be taken up for consideration during the period running from the date on which ordinary elections have been held or a decision on extra elections has been made public until the Riksdag elected through such elections has convened. A motion concerning a minister who holds office pursuant to Article 8 of Chapter 6 after having been discharged may in no case be taken up for consideration. A motion for a declaration of no confidence shall not be prepared by a Riksdag Committee. Art. 5. Any member of the Riksdag may, according to provisions to be laid down in the Riksdag Act, submit an interpellation or put a question to a minister in any matter concerning the minister's performance of his duties. Art. 6. The Riksdag shall elect one or more Ombudsmen for the purpose of supervising, under instructions determined by the Riksdag, the application in public service of laws and other statutes. An Ombudsman may initiate legal proceedings in such cases as are indicated in the instructions. An Ombudsman may be present at the deliberations of a court or 23

an administrative authority and shall have access to the minutes and other documents of any such court or authority. Any court or administrative authority as well as any civil servant of the State or a municipality shall provide an Ombudsman with such information and reports as the latter requests. An obligation to this effect shall be incumbent also on any other person who is under the supervisory authority of the Ombudsman. Any public prosecutor shall on request assist the Ombudsman. Further provisions concerning the Ombudsman shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act. Art. 7. The Riksdag shall from among its members elect auditors for the purpose of examining the activities of the State. The Riksdag may decide that the examination by the auditors shall comprise other activities as well. The Riksdag shall adopt an instruction for the auditors. The auditors may, in accordance with provisions to be set forth by law, demand such documents, data, and reports as are necessary for their examination. Further provisions concerning the auditors shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act.

Art. 8. Proceedings under penal law on account of a criminal act
committed in the exercise of the official functions of a member of the Supreme Court or the Supreme Administrative Court shall be brought before the Supreme Court by an Ombudsman of the Riksdag or by the Attorney General. The Supreme Court shall likewise examine and decide whether a member of the Supreme Court or the Supreme Administrative Court shall, in accordance with the provisions prescribed in this respect, be removed from his office or suspended from exercising his functions or shall be obliged to undergo a medical examination. Proceedings to this effect shall be initiated by an Ombudsman of the Riksdag or by the Attorney General.

Chapter 13. WAR AND DANGER OF WAR

Art. 1. If the Realm becomes involved in war or becomes exposed
to danger of war, and the Riksdag is not in session, the Government or the Speaker shall convene the Riksdag. The person who issues the notice convening the Riksdag may decide that the Riksdag shall 24

meet at a place other than Stockholm. If the Riksdag is in session, the Riksdag or the Speaker may determine the place of the meeting. Art. 2. If the Realm is at war or is exposed to an immediate danger of war, a War Delegation, designated from among the members of the Riksdag, shall replace the Riksdag, if circumstances so warrant. If the Realm is at war, an order to the effect that the War Delegation shall replace the Riksdag shall be issued by the members of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council according to further provisions to be set forth in the Riksdag Act. If possible, the Prime Minister shall be consulted before such order is issued. If war conditions prevent the Council from convening, the order shall be issued by the Government. If the Realm is exposed to an immediate danger of war, such order shall be issued jointly by the members of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council and the Prime Minister. Such order shall be effective only if the Prime Minister and six members of the Council agree thereon. The War Delegation and the Government may, either in joint consultation or separately, decide that the Riksdag shall reassume its powers. Rules regarding the composition of the War Delegation shall be set forth in the Riksdag Act. Art. 3. While the War Delegation is replacing the Riksdag, it shall exercise the powers which are otherwise vested in the Riksdag. However, the War Delegation may not make decisions within occupied territory. Nor may it make such decisions as are referred to in the first sentence of the first paragraph or in the second or fourth paragraph of Section 11. The War Delegation shall itself determine its working-methods. If the Realm is at war, and if in consequence thereof the Government cannot fulfil its duties, the Riksdag may decide on the formation of a Government and on the working-methods of the Government. Art. 5. If the Realm is at war, and if in consequence thereof neither the Riksdag nor the War Delegation can fulfil its duties, the Government shall assume these duties to the extent that it considers it necessary for the purpose of protecting the Realm and ending the war. The Government may not by virtue of the preceding paragraph enact, amend, or repeal any fundamental law, the Riksdag Act, or any act concerning elections for the Riksdag. 25
Art. 4.

Art. 6. If the Realm is at war, or is exposed to danger of war, or if such exceptional conditions prevail as are due to war or to a danger of war to which the Realm has been exposed, the Government may, with authorization by law, issue by way of decrees such regulations in a particular matter which, under the fundamental laws, are otherwise to be set forth by law. If in any other case it is necessary with regard to the defensive preparedness, the Government may, with authorization by law, decide by way of decrees that any provision set forth by law and regarding requisition or other such disposition shall commence or cease to be applied. In any law giving authorization such as is referred to in the preceding paragraph the conditions under which the authorization may be used shall be set forth in a well-defined manner. Such authorization does not empower the Government to enact, amend, or repeal any fundamental law, the Riksdag Act, or any act concerning elections for the Riksdag. Art. 7. If the Realm is at war or is exposed to an immediate danger of war, the Government may, with authorization by the Riksdag, decide that a function which by virtue of a fundamental law devolves on the Government shall be carried out by another authority. Such authorization may not include any power under Articles 5 or 6, unless it concerns solely a decision to the effect that a law in a particular matter shall commence to be applied. In times of war, danger of war, or such exceptional conditions as are due to a war, exceptions may be made with respect to any court having jurisdiction over any detachment of the defence forces, from that provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 11 which set forth that there shall be permanent judges in any court. Art. 8. The Government may enter into an agreement of armistice without seeking the approval of the Riksdag and without consulting the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council, if deferment of the agreement should entail danger for the Realm. Art. 9. No decision may be made within an area under foreign occupation which in effect enacts, amends, or abrogates a fundamental law, the Riksdag Act, an act concerning elections for the Riksdag, or a law concerning high treason, criminal offences against the security of the Realm, misconduct in office, criminal offences by members of the armed forces, sabotage, riots, instigation of rebellion, or subversive spreading of rumours. Within an area under foreign occupation no public organ may make any decision or take any measure which obligates any citizen 26

of the Realm to give such assistance to the occupying power which the latter is not entitled to demand under the rules of public international law. No matter may be decided upon by the Riksdag within an area under foreign occupation, unless not less than three-fourths of its members concur in the decision. Art. 10. If the Realm is at war, the Head of State should accompany the Government. If he stays at another place than the Government, he shall be considered to be prevented from fulfilling his duties as Head of State. Art. 11. If the Realm is at war, elections for the Riksdag may be held only upon decision by the Riksdag. If the Realm is exposed to danger of war when ordinary elections are to be held, the Riksdag may decide to defer the elections. Such decision shall be reconsidered within one year and thereafter at intervals of not more than one year. Such decision as is referred to in the present paragraph shall be effective only if not less than three-fourths of the Riksdag members have concurred therein. If any part of the Realm is under foreign occupation when elections are to be held, the Riksdag shall determine such adjustments of the provisions of Chapter 3 as are called for. However, no exceptions may be made from the provisions of the first paragraph of Article 1, Article 2, the first paragraph of Article 6, or Articles 7 to 11 of Chapter 3. Any reference to the Realm in the provisions of the first paragraph of Article 6, the second paragraph of Article 7, and the second paragraph of Article 8 of Chapter 3 shall instead apply to that part of the Realm for which elections are to be held. Not less than one-tenth of all the seats shall be adjustment seats. Ordinary elections which, in consequence of the provisions of the first paragraph of the present Article, are not held at he time prescribed shall be held as soon as possible after the war has ended or the danger of war has subsided. It shall be incumbent upon the Government and the Speaker, either in joint consultation or separately, to see to it that the measures necessary for this purpose are taken. If, in consequence of the provisions of the present Article, ordinary elections have been held at a time other than that at which they should otherwise have been held the Riksdag shall determine the date for the next following ordinary elections to be in that month during the third or fourth year following the first-mentioned elections in which ordinary elections shall be held according to the Riksdag Act.
5-740488

27

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

1.
By the present Instrument of Government the former Instrument of Government is repealed. The former Instrument of Government shall, however, with the exceptions mentioned below, be applied in place of the new Instrument of Government until the end of that calendar year during which the Riksdag finally adopts the latter Instrument and, in such cases as are mentioned below, even thereafter. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 3 of the present Instrument of Government the Riksdag shall consist of three hundred and fifty members until the expiry of the current electoral period. The provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 3 of the present Instrument of Government concerning the right to vote shall commence to be applied in connection with the establishment of the electoral register in the year after that during which the Riksdag finally adopts the present Instrument of Government. If new elections for the Riksdag are to be held before the time at which the present Instrument of Government shall commence to be applied pursuant to the provisions of Article 1, then the provisions of Chapter 3 concerning the number of members of the Riksdag and concerning substitutes for them, or concerning the time for extra elections, the time for the first session of a newly-elected Riksdag, the election period for the newly-elected Riksdag, the distribution of the seats among constituencies and among parties, the competence of a Riksdag member, and appeal against elections for the Riksdag, as well as the corresponding provisions of any other law, shall be applied. After such elections have been held the provisions of Article 7 of Chapter 4 concerning the examination of the competence of a Riksdag member or of a substitute for such member as well as the provisions of Article 9 of Chapter 4 concerning substitutes for members of the Riksdag shall be applicable. The Riksdag shall, as soon as the present Instrument of Government has received the force of a fundamental law, elect members of the Election Review Committee and, according to provisions to be laid down in the Riksdag Act, substitutes for such members. The provisions of Articles 16 and 17 of Chapter 8 of the present Instrument of Government shall be applied with regard to the new Riksdag Act, as soon as the present Instrument of Government has received the force of a fundamental law. With respect to any court at which there is only one office for a 28

permanent judge at the time when the present Instrument of Government commences to be applicable the provisions of the first sentence of the third paragraph of Article 1 of Chapter 11 shall be applicable only after those changes with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of the courts which are in progress have been completed insofar as they concern such court.

3.
Ordinary elections for the Riksdag under Article 3 of Chapter 3 of the present Instrument of Government shall take place at such time in the year 1976 as shall be determined in the Riksdag Act. The electoral period for the Riksdag members which is in progress when the present Instrument of Government receives the force of a fundamental law shall come to an end when the nearest thereafter elected Riksdag has convened. 6. Any previous statute or provision shall continue to be applicable notwithstanding the fact that it has not been enacted in such manner as should have been used by application of the present Instrument of Government. Any authorization decided jointly by the King in Council and the Riksdag, or by the Riksdag alone may be made use of even after the point in time referred to in Section 1 and until the Riksdag determines otherwise. The provisions of Article 17 of Chapter 8 of the present Instrument of Government shall be applied with respect to any previous statute which has been enacted by way of a joint decision of the King in Council and the Riksdag, or by way of a decision of the Riksdag alone. 7. Provisions of any previous law or other statute which refer to the King or to the King in Council shall be applied to the Government, unless it follows from a statute or is otherwise evident from the circumstances that the reference is to the King in person, or to the Supreme Court, the Supreme Administrative Court, or an Administrative Court of Appeal.

8.
If in any law or other statute there is a reference or other allusion
1 (Sections 4 and 5 relate exclusively to the hypothetic situation where King Gustaf VI Adolf would be King after the entry into force of the new Instrument of Government. The King died on September 15, 1973.)

29

to a rule which has been replaced by a provision of the present Instrument of Government, the new provision shall instead be applied.
9.

Representatives of the Church of Sweden shall convene in General Church Assembly in accordance with special provisions. Only a person who professes himself to the faith of the Church may be appointed to a clerical office. Where another office implies an obligation to teach Christian religion or theological science, such regard shall be taken to the faith of the applicants as may accordingly be called for. No holder of an office who does not belong to the Swedish Church may take part in deciding any matter concerning the religious activities of the Church, or religious instruction, the exercise of clerical functions or promotion or responsibility of an official within the Church. However, when such matter is to be determined by the Government such estoppel as has now been referred to shall not apply to any person other than the minister reporting on the matter. The Government shall appoint to Arch Bishop or Bishop one out of those three persons who have been proposed in the manner prescribed by ecclesiastical law. Provisions regarding appointments to clerical offices in the parishes and concerning the right which in that respect is to be conferred on the Government shall be laid down by ecclesiastical law. Notwithstanding the provisions of the present Instrument of Government which are to the effect that laws shall be enacted, amended, or repealed by the Riksdag, ecclesiastical law shall be enacted, amended, or repealed jointly by the Government and the Riksdag, provided, however, that in such context the consent of a General Church Assembly shall likewise be required. If a proposition for ecclesiastical law adopted by the Riksdag has not been promulgated as law before the beginning of the next following ordinary session of the Riksdag, the proposition shall be void. The provisions of the present Instrument of Government which relate to primary municipalities shall, with the exception of the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article 6 of Chapter 1, be applied, mutatis mutandis, to the church communities. By the present Instrument of Government no changes are made in what has hitherto been prescribed under Article 2 of the former Instrument of Government. The privileges, benefits, rights, and freedoms of the former clergy shall continue to be applied, unless they have been inseparably connected with the right of representation which was previously con30

ferred on the clergy and have consequently ceased to exist together with that right. No amendment or abrogation of such privileges, benefits, rights, and freedoms may be brought about otherwise than by concurring decisions of the Government and the Riksdag and the assent of the General Church Assembly. CARL GUSTAF Lennart Geijer (Ministry of Justice)

31

THE RIKSDAG ACT Chapter 1. SESSIONS Art. 1. General elections to the Riksdag shall be held in September. Directions regarding the date for holding extra elections are given in Chapter 3, Article 4, and Chapter 6, Article 3, of the Instrument of Government. Art. 2. After elections to the Riksdag, the Riksdag shall assemble to ordinary session on the date prescribed in Chapter 3, Article 5, of the Instrument of Government. The Riksdag shall every year, when general elections to the Riksdag are not held, assemble to ordinary session on the day in September or October which the Riksdag has decided upon at the immediately preceding ordinary session. If extra elections have been proclaimed before the fixed day and if, on account of the elections, the Riksdag has not assembled to session in July at the latest, session in accordance with this paragraph shall not begin. Supplementary provision 1.2.1 The Speaker's Conference shall submit proposals to the Riksdag as to the day when ordinary session shall begin in the years when general elections to the Riksdag are not held. Art. 3. The Riksdag shall assemble to extraordinary session if so ordered by the Government or the Speaker. It is incumbent upon the Speaker to summon an extraordinary session if at least one hundred and fifteen members of the Riksdag so request and give reasons for their representation. The session shall then begin within twenty days of the request being presented. Summons to an extraordinary session shall be published in the public gazette not later than the day before the session begins. Art. 4. Ordinary session which has begun during August, Septem33

ber or October shall be prorogued not later than on May 31 the following year. If there are special reasons for doing so, the Riksdag can prolong the session but not longer, however, than up to and including June 15. Other sessions continue as long as the Riksdag finds it necessary. A session shall be prorogued not later than when the next ordinary session shall begin. If the Government has ordered an extra election, it can, during the remainder of the election period, decide to terminate a session. The session shall be prorogued immediately after the decision has been announced at a meeting of the Chamber.

Supplementary provision
1.4.1 The Speaker's Conference shall express its opinion to the Riksdag on the question of prolongation to a date after May 31 of a session which has begun during August, September or October.

Art. 5. The report of the Election Review Committee of the Riksdag on the examination of the warrants of election of members and deputies shall be read at the first meeting of the Chamber during a session. Reports on the examination of warrants which have been received during a session shall be read as soon as possibie. Roll-call shall be taken at the first meeting. The election of a Speaker and Deputy Speakers shall then be held in the cases referred to in Chapter 8, Article 1.

Supplementary provision
1.5.1 The first meeting of the Chamber during a session shall begin at 11 a .m. If possible, the Secretariat of the Chamber shall inform the members of the Riksdag in writing, or by cable, of the date of the first meeting.

Art. 6. Ordinary session shall be opened at a special meeting of the
Chamber not later than on the third day of the session. At the request of the Speaker, the Head of State shall declare the session opened. In the unavoidable absence of the Head of State, the Speaker shall declare the session opened. At the meeting the Prime Minister shall give a Statement of Government Policy unless special 34

reasons indicate otherwise. After consultation with the Deputy Speakers, the Speaker shall determine the procedure for this meeting.

Supplementary provision 1.6.1 The meeting for the opening of the session shall take place at 2 p.m. on the first day of the session unless the Speaker determines otherwise. Art. 7. The Speaker or, in his stead, one of the Deputy Speakers shall conduct the business of the Riksdag. The Speaker's Conference shall deliberate on measures for promoting the methodical conduct of the business of the Riksdag. The Speaker's Conference consists of the Speaker, the Deputy Speakers, one representative of each party group in the Riksdag representing a party with no less than four per cent of the national vote at the immediately preceding elections to the Riksdag, the Chairmen of the Riksdag Committees and also the Vice-Chairman of the Board of Administration of the Riksdag. The representatives of the party groups shall be appointed at the beginning of each ordinary session for the period up to the beginning of the next ordinary session. Their selection shall be subject to the same procedure as that prescribed in Chapter 7, Article 12, first paragraph.

Supplementary provisions 1.7.1 The Speaker's Conference shall convene at the summons of the Speaker. 1.7.2 In the unavoidable absence of the Chairman of a Committee, the Vice-Chairman shall take his place. Deputies for the representatives of the party groups need not be selected. The Speaker's Conference shall meet behind closed doors. If the Conference wishes to obtain information from any person who is not a member of the Conference, it may summon him to attend a meeting. The Clerk of the Chamber and the Managing Director of the Office of Administration may participate in the deliberations of the Conference. 1.7.3 Minutes shall be kept of the meetings of the Conference. The deci35

sions of the Conference shall be communicated to those to whom the decisions refer. Art. 8. A member of the Riksdag can be granted leave of absence from his duties after his case has been considered. If a member has been granted leave of absence for a period of not less than one month, his duties shall be carried out by a deputy during the period he is granted leave of absence.

Supplementary provision 1.8.1 Application for leave of absence from the duties of a member of the Riksdag shall give the grounds on which the application are based. The application shall refer to leave of absence for a specified period. The application shall be considered by the Speaker if it refers to leave of absence for a period shorter than one month and by the Riksdag if it refers to a longer period. Art. 9. When a deputy shall enter into office by virtue of a provision in the Instrument of Government or Article 8 of this Chapter, the Speaker shall summon the deputy to enter upon his duties. When so doing the Speaker shall observe the order of precedence between deputies which has been determined by virtue of the Riksdag Election Act. If there are special reasons for so doing, the Speaker may, however, depart from the prescribed order.

Supplementary provision 1.9.1 A deputy who shall exercise his duties as a member of the Riksdag shall receive a written confirmation to this effect. The confirmation shall state which member is to be replaced by the deputy and the time of the beginning and the termination of the appointment. A certificate confirming the last day of the appointment can be issued separately. The Speaker shall announce to the Chamber when a deputy replaces a member and when a member resumes his seat. Chapter 2. MEETINGS OF THE CHAMBER Art. 1. The Speaker shall conduct the meetings of the Chamber. 36

In the deliberations on a subject which is included on the agenda he may not utter an opinion on the facts of the matter. Art. 2. In the unavoidable absence of the Speaker, one of the Deputy Speakers shall conduct the meeting. If all the Deputy Speakers are prevented from being present, the meeting shall be conducted by that member present who has been a member of the Riksdag for the longest time. If two or more have been members of the Riksdag equally long, the one who is the senior in age shall take precedence. The same procedure shall apply before a Speaker and Deputy Speakers have been elected The provisions of Article 1 on the limitation of the Speaker's right of utterance shall also apply to the member who conducts the meeting of the Chamber. Art. 3. Each member shall have his/her own seat in the Assembly Hall.

Supplementary provision 2.3.1 The members shall take their seats in the Assembly Hall by constituencies. There shall be special seats for the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers and also for Ministers. Art. 4. Meetings of the Chamber shall be public. A meeting can, however, take place behind closed doors if the security of the realm so requires, or otherwise in consideration of relations with another state or an international organization. This is a matter to be decided by the Riksdag. If the Government shall deliver a message to the Riksdag at a meeting, the Government can also order that the meeting shall take place behind closed doors. A member or an official of the Riksdag must not unauthorizedly disclose what has occurred at a meeting behind closed doors. The Riksdag can, however, decide in a particular case to wholly or partly waive the order that absolute secrecy be observed.

Supplementary provision 2.4.1 There shall be special seats for the public in the Assembly Hall. A member of the public who behaves in a disturbing manner can be 37

ordered to leave immediately. If disorder should occur among the public, the Speaker can order all members of the public to leave. Art. 5. Recording from a public meeting of the Chamber for radio or television transmission may be made on agreement with the Speaker's Conference. Art. 6. Summons to meetings other than those referred to in Chapter 1, Articles 5 or 6, shall be issued by the Speaker. The summons shall be posted in the premises of the Riksdag not later than 6 p.m. the day before the meeting and at least fourteen hours in advance. In very special circumstances the summons may, however, be posted later. In such a case, the meeting may be held only if more than half the members of the Riksdag consent thereto.

Supplementary provisions 2.6.1 Summons to a meeting should, if possible, be published in one or more daily newspapers. If it is intended that a meeting shall continue after 7 p.m., the Speaker shall inform the Chamber verbally and by posting a notice to that effect before 5 p.m. on the day of the meeting. 2.6.2 When elections are to be held this shall be specifically stated in the summons. Art. 7. The Speaker shall for each meeting prepare an agenda listing all matters which are pending in the Chamber. Exception may be made for a matter which it is assumed will be considered behind closed doors. The Speaker shall present items of business at the meeting in the order in which they have been listed on the agenda. Elections to be held at the meeting are analogous to items of business. Supplementary provisions 2.7.1 Proposals to elect a new Prime Minister or motions on a declaration of no-confidence shall be entered as the first item on the agenda. In other respects the matters shall be entered in the following order unless the Speaker determines otherwise: 38

1. elections, 2. propositions* and communications from the Government with accounts of certain activities, 3. proposals and reports from Riksdag organs other than Committees, 4. private members' motions, 5. Committee reports in the order the Committees are listed in the supplementary provision 4.2.1. 2.7.2 For each item on the agenda an annotation shall be made about tabling. If a Committee has requested that a matter shall be decided after only one tabling, special annotation shall be made. 2.7.3 Directions governing notifications on the agenda in special cases are given in the supplementary provisions 2.10.1, 2.14.1, 3.6.1, 6.1.1, 6.1.2 and 6.2.2. 2.7.4 Before each meeting the agenda shall be posted in the Assembly Hall and at such other places as are decided by the Speaker. It shall also be distributed to the members and to the Committees. The agenda, together with the documents pertaining thereto, shall be accessible in the Secretariat of the Chamber. Art. 8. A decision to close a meeting or to adjourn a meeting in progress shall be made by the Chamber without previous deliberation. Art. 9. The Speaker shall put the questions for decision. If he finds that a motion is in violation of the fundamental laws or the Riksdag Act he shall refuse to put the question, stating the reason for his refusal. If the Chamber nevertheless demands that the question be put, the Speaker shall refer the matter to the Committee on the Constitution for decision. A question may not be refused to be put on any matter the Committee has declared not to be in violation of the fundamental laws or this Riksdag Act.
* The nearest English equivalent to the Swedish term "propositioner" is "government bills". Similarly, the English expression corresponding most closely to the Swedish term "motioner" is "private members' bills" (cf., Chapter 3, Article 9, of the Riksdag Act, et. al.). One of the reasons for using "propositions" and "private members' motions", respectively, in this translation is that in Sweden it is not necessary to introduce "bills" in the form of draft laws. "Motion" is used here only in the phrase "private members' motions", hence in a more restricted sense than in Anglo-American constitutional law. 39

Art. 10. At a meeting each member and each Minister may, with the exceptions prescribed in this Riksdag Act, speak freely on all questions under consideration and on the lawfulness of all that takes place at the meeting. The Head of State can make a Declaration of Office before the Chamber. The Speaker can, after consultation with the members of the Speaker's Conference appointed by the party groups, decide to discuss matters not connected with other matters under consideration at a meeting of the Chamber. Such a discussion may be restricted to a particular subject or be divided into sections according to subject.

Supplementary provision 2.10.1 Notification regarding debate in accordance with the third paragraph of Article 10 shall be placed on the agenda for the meeting at which the debate shall take place. Art. 11. No one may participate in the deliberation at a meeting, of a matter which concerns him personally or someone closely related to him. A Minister may, however, participate in the discussion of a matter concerning his official duties. Art. 12. No one may express himself improperly at a meeting about any person or indulge in personally insulting remarks or otherwise in word or deed conduct himself in a manner inconsistent with good order. The member who has the floor shall restrict his speech to the subject under deliberation. If anyone does not adhere to the requirements of the first paragraph and does not comply with the Speaker's admonition, the Speaker may deprive him of his right to speak during the deliberation in progress. Art. 13. The Speaker shall consult with the members of the Speaker's Conference appointed by the party groups concerning the arrangement of the deliberations of the Chamber. Art. 14. In supplementary provisions to this Riksdag Act the Riksdag can prescribe limits on the number of speeches which a speaker may make during the deliberation of a question and the time for each speech. In that context a distinction may be made 40

between different categories of speakers, such as Ministers and representatives of a majority or a minority in Committees or of party groups and also between speakers who have complied with the request of the Speaker of advance notification before a deliberation and speakers who have failed to do so. Limitation of the right to speak pursuant to the first paragraph can also be decided on the proposal of the Speaker especially in connection with the deliberation of a specific question. The decision shall be taken without previous deliberation. When applying this Article it shall always be observed that any member who wishes to speak on a question may speak for six minutes. The right of refutation and rejoinder stated in the second paragraph of Article 15 stands, irrespective of any decision made in accordance with this Article.
Supplementary provisions

2.14.1 A member who wishes to speak at deliberations in the Chamber should, if possible, notify the Secretariat of the Chamber not later than the day before the meeting at which the deliberations shall begin. The Speaker can at the first tabling of the report of a Committee request the members who wish to speak when the matter is to be decided to notify their intention to speak in accordance with the first paragraph and then state the estimated duration of their speeches. The Speaker's request shall be recorded on the agenda which includes the report. Speech by a member who has failed to give advance notification may not exceed six minutes unless the Speaker considers there are grounds for allowing a longer time. 2.14.2 Speeches at a specially arranged debate, which has no connection with other deliberations, may not exceed fifteen minutes or, in the case of speeches by Ministers or of a specially appointed representative of each party group, thirty minutes. A party group shall notify the Speaker of the name of the representative referred to in the first paragraph.
Art. 15. The Speaker shall, before the deliberation of a certain

question, determine the order in which speakers shall take the floor among those who have given advance notification. Those members who ask permission to speak in the course of a debate shall speak in the order in which they have notified the Speaker.
41

A Minister may, notwithstanding the provision contained in the first paragraph, make a short speech in order to answer another speaker. With the permission of the Speaker a member can be allowed to speak, irrespective of the order of speakers, for the purpose of making a rejoinder to another speaker. Supplementary provisions 2.15.1 Irrespective of the order in which members are to speak, the Speaker may give the floor to a member to make a rejoinder which contains information or correction in connection with the speech delivered by the preceding speaker or for refuting an attack. The time limit for a rejoinder may not exceed three minutes unless the Speaker grants an extension to six minutes for special reasons. Each speaker may make two rejoinders in connection with the same main speech. 2.15.2 Irrespective of the order in which members are to speak, a member may, during the deliberation of a question, concur with the immediately preceding speaker without stating his grounds. 2.15.3 A brief speech on a particular subject by a Minister to refute another speaker may not exceed ten minutes. If the Speaker has already permitted a member the right to make a rejoinder, this member may speak before the Minister. 2.15.4 Anyone who speaks shall speak from the rostrum or from his place in the Assembly Hall. Art. 16. Complete minutes shall be kept of meetings of the Chamber. No one shall have the right to speak without his remarks being recorded in the minutes. A decision may not be changed at the approval of the minutes. The minutes kept of meetings of the Chamber and the documents which it is considered should be included in the appendix to these minutes shall be published unless special provisions require their being classified as secret. Supplementary provisions 2.16.1 Statements made at meetings shall be recorded and shall be access42

ible without delay at the Secretariat of the Chamber. If a speaker Ms made no objection to the records by noon on the fifth day after the meeting it shall be assumed that he has approved them. If a speaker confirms the accuracy of the records he should sign or initial the records. 2.16.2 Minutes shall be approved by the Chamber on the seventh day after the meeting, if the Riksdag meets then or otherwise at the immediately following meeting. Minutes which have not been approved by the end of a session shall be approved at a date to be decided by the Speaker. Notification as to the date for such approval shall be published in that or those newspapers in which meetings of the Chamber are announced. The approval of the minutes shall be made before the members who are present. At the meeting for the approval of minutes, a member has the right to request correction of a speech the record of which another member has approved according to 2.16.1.

Chapter 3. INTRODUCTION OF BUSINESS Art. 1. The Government shall submit proposals to the Riksdag by means of propositions. A proposition shall always be accompanied by the minutes of the Government on the matter, by an account of the earlier consideration of the matter, by a statement of reasons, and by the opinion of the Law Council, if such is available.

Supplementary provision 3.1.1 A proposition shall be submitted by delivering it to the Secretariat of the Chamber. Notification of the proposition shall be made by the Speaker at a meeting of the Chamber after it has been distributed to the members of the Riksdag. Art. 2. The fiscal year begins on July 1. The Government shall not later than January 10 or, if this is impossible owing to a recent change of Government, as soon as possible thereafter present a proposition giving the budget proposals ("budgetproposition") for the next fiscal year. The proposition shall contain a budget statement ("finansplan") and an economic survey ("nationalbudget").
6-740488

43

The Government shall present a special supplementary proposition concerning the final settlement of the budget ("kompletteringsproposition"). Such a proposition shall be presented before the expiry of April unless there is impediment thereto. Other propositions concerning appropriations for the next fiscal year shall be presented not later than March 10 unless the Government finds that the consideration of the proposition can be postponed until the next session. Propositions presenting proposals for new or considerably increased appropriations should contain an estimate of future costs for the purpose envisaged in the proposal. If proposals concerning appropriations are based on a plan covering a period longer than that for which the appropriations are estimated in the proposition an account should be given of this plan. Art. 3. Propositions other than those referred to in Article 2 shall be presented not later than March 31 if the Government considers that the propositions should be considered during the session in progress. Art. 4. The provisions of Article 2, second paragraph, and Article 3, concerning the time when propositions shall be introduced, apply only to ordinary sessions which, according to Chapter 1, Article 4, shall be prorogued not later than May 31. The provisions do not apply 1. if the budget proposition, by virtue of Article 2, has been introduced after January 10, 2. in respect of a proposition whereby, according to law, the Government presents an already issued ordinance to the Riksdag for its consideration, 3. if the Government finds that there are special grounds for presenting the proposition later. Art. 5. The Government should submit its propositions at such times so that an accumulation of work in the Riksdag is, if possible, prevented. The Government shall consult with the Speaker on this matter. Propositions can also be submitted when the Riksdag is not in session. Art. 6. The Government may communicate information to the Riksdag in writing or a Minister may inform it verbally at a meeting of the Chamber. 44

Supplementary provisions 3.6.1 If a Minister is to communicate information verbally to the Riksdag at a meeting of the Chamber, a note to this effect should be made on the agenda for the meeting. 3.6.2 The Government shall annually, simultaneously with the budget proposition, report to the Riksdag on the work of the committees which have been appointed by the Government. Art. 7. A Committee has the right to present proposals to the Riksdag on matters within its jurisdiction.
Art. 8.

Other bodies which are wholly or partially appointed by the Riksdag may present proposals to the Riksdag on questions which concern the competence, organization, personnel or activities of the body. The Riksdag can direct that such a body may also in other cases present proposals to the Riksdag. Special provisions are laid down concerning annual reports by the Riksdag organs to the Riksdag.

Supplementary provisions 3.8.1 The proposals and annual reports of a Riksdag organ referred to in Article 8 shall be filed with the Secretariat of the Chamber and shall be announced by the Speaker at a meeting of the Chamber after the proposals or annual reports have been distributed to the members of the Riksdag. 3.8.2 The Speaker's Conference may submit proposals to the Riksdag on questions which concern the conduct of the business of the Riksdag. The Speaker's Conference can also in other cases introduce proposals in the Riksdag on questions which concern the Riksdag organs if the proposals are based on a report by a committee which has been appointed by the Speaker's Conference on the instructions of the Riksdag. The Board of Administration of the Riksdag may submit proposals to the Riksdag on questions which concern the administration services of the Riksdag or its authorities if these questions fall within the jurisdiction of the Board.
45

3.8.3 Special provisions are laid down concerning the right of the Commissioners of the Bank of Sweden, the Commissioners of the National Debt Office, the Ombudsmen of the Riksdag and the Auditors of the Riksdag to submit proposals on other questions than those referred to in the first paragraph, first sentence, of Article 8. Art. 9. Members of the Riksdag shall submit proposals to the Riksdag by means of private members' motions. Matters of varying nature may not be combined in one and the same motion.

Supplementary provision 3.9.1 Private members' motions shall be handed in to the Secretariat of the Chamber. Private members' motions shall be handed in not later than 5 p.m. on the last day for submitting motions. Private members' motions should be delivered in four copies and include information as to the party to which the member introducing the motion belongs and the number of his seat in the Assembly Hall. Private members' motions shall be reported to the Chamber by the Speaker. Art. 10. Private members' motions may be introduced within fifteen days of the day the budget proposition was reported to the Chamber. If the session terminates before the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions has expired, a new period of fifteen days runs from the beginning of the next ordinary session. If, in some case, the budget is adopted for a period other than the fiscal year the extension of the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions shall be determined by the Riksdag. Art. 11. In addition to what is prescribed in Article 10 private members' motions, occasioned by a proposition, may be introduced within fifteen days of the day the proposition was reported to the Chamber. In the case of matters requiring prompt decision, the Riksdag can, if it considers so necessary, and the Government so recommends, decide to shorten the period within which private members' motions are to be introduced. The Riksdag can decide to prolong, by a maximum of ten days, the period allowed for the introduction of private members' motions occasioned by a proposi-

46

tion based on a plan such as referred to in the third paragraph of Article 2. In cases prescribed by the Riksdag, private members' motions may be introduced referring to a written communication from the Government reporting on certain activities. In such cases the provisions of the first paragraph shall be correspondingly applicable. When determining the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions in accordance with this Article, no account shall be taken of any days falling within a longer adjournment of Riksdag business during a session.

Supplementary provisions

3.11.1 Requests for the prolongation of the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions, in accordance with the first paragraph, last sentence, of Article 11, may be presented not later than at the second meeting after that when the proposition was reported to the Chamber. Decision on prolongation shall be reached not later than at the subsequently following meeting. 3.11.2 Private members' motions may also be introduced in connection with a written communication from the Government giving an annual report of the activities of Statsforetag AB (Swedish National Enterprises Inc.). 3.11.3 The Speaker's Conference shall determine which days shall not be included in the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions according to the third paragraph of Article 11.
Art. 12. If a proposition has been postponed from one session to

another session, private members' motions occasioned by the proposition may be introduced 1. at the first session during an election period within seven days of its opening, ?. if a proposition has been introduced so late during a session that the period prescribed in Article 11 for the introduction of private members' motions has not expired when the session terminates, not later than the second day of the next ordinary session or, if the Riksdag has decided beforehand to consider the proposition at an extraordinary session, within seven days of the date of the decision.
47

In the application of the first paragraph a written communication, such as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 11, shall be analogous to a proposition. Art. 13. The provisions of Articles 11 and 12 shall be correspondingly applicable to private members' motions occasioned by the proposal of an organ of the Riksdag referred to in Article 8. The Riksdag can direct that private members' motions may be introduced also in connection with an annual report from such an organ to the Riksdag.

Supplementary provision 3.13.1 Private members' motions may be introduced in connection with reports presented by the Commissioners of the Bank of Sweden, the Commissioners of the National Debt Office, the Board of the Riksdag Library, the Ombudsmen of the Riksdag or the Auditors of the Riksdag. Art. 14. If the Riksdag has been summoned to an extraordinary session on account of a request by members of the Riksdag, private members' motions on questions which occasioned the summons are to be introduced within four days after the beginning of the session. Art. 15. Private members' motions in connection with an event of major importance may be introduced by a minimum of ten members jointly during a session if the event could not be foreseen or observed during the time allowed for the introduction of private members' motions referred to in Article 10 or could have occasioned the right to introduce motions by virtue of other provisions of this Chapter. Art. 16. The Committee on the Constitution shall report pending decisions to the Chamber for final decision on matters concerning the fundamental laws or the Riksdag Act. If, according to the provisions of the Instrument of Government, the procedure prescribed for amendments of fundamental laws is to be applied otherwise, any pending decision in the matter shall be reported by the Committee dealing with the matter. Art. 17. Motions on declaration of no-confidence shall be raised at a meeting of the Chamber. A motion shall be delivered in writing for the minutes as soon as it has been raised. 48

Art. 18. If a prosecutor calls for the Riksdag to consent, in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 8, first paragraph of the Instrument of Government, to a member of the Riksdag being prosecuted or limitations being imposed on his personal liberty, the prosecutor shall make a written application to this effect to the Speaker. The above provisions relative to a prosecutor shall also apply to any other person who requests the consent of the Riksdag to bring an action in a court against a member of the Riksdag on grounds of his acts or omissions. If the application document is so incomplete that the Riksdag cannot take it up for consideration or if the applicant has not proved that he has grounds for taking or demanding such an action to be taken by an authority, the Speaker shall reject the application. Otherwise he shall report it at a meeting of the Chamber. Supplementary provision 3.18.1 The applicant shall state in the application document the circumstances on which the application is grounded. Art. 19. Propositions and private members' motions may be withdrawn until such time as the appropriate Committee has presented its report on the matter. If a proposition is withdrawn, private members' motions occasioned by the proposition shall be cancelled. If a proposition has been withdrawn, private members' motions occasioned by this withdrawal may be introduced within seven days from the day the withdrawal was reported in the Chamber. Supplementary provision 3.19.1 Withdrawal shall be made in a written communication, which shall be delivered to the Secretariat of the Chamber. The Speaker shall cancel proposals which have been withdrawn or become void as a result of the withdrawal and shall report this to the Chamber. If the proposal has been submitted to a Committee, this Committee shall be informed of the withdrawal. Art. 20. The provisions generally applicable to calculation of statutory time-limits shall also be applicable to periods within which an action may be taken at the latest under the provisions of this Chapter. 49

Chapter 4. THE PREPARATION OF BUSINESS Art. 1. Propositions, private members' motions as well as proposals by and annual reports of the Riksdag organs mentioned in Chapter 3, Article 8, shall be referred to a Committee for consideration. The same shall apply to an application such as that specified in Chapter 3, Article 18, and which the Speaker has reported to the Chamber, as well as communications from the Government reporting on a certain activity. Before a matter is referred to a Committee it shall, unless the Chamber decides to refer it to a Committee immediately, lie on the table until the next meeting of the Chamber. Art. 2. The Riksdag shall at the beginning of each ordinary session appoint from among its members one Committee on the Constitution, one Committee on Finance, one Committee on Taxation and at least twelve other Committees. The election to the Committees shall be valid until the next ordinary session opens. The Riksdag can during a session appoint additional Committees for a period not exceeding that stated in the first paragraph.

Supplementary provisions 4.2.1 The Riksdag shall within one week of the beginning of an ordinary session appoint the following sixteen Committees: 1. one Committee on the Constitution (KU) Finance (FiU) „ Taxation (SkU) „ Justice (JuU) „ Laws (LU) „ Foreign Affairs (UU) 6. „ „ Defence (FOU) „ Social Insurance (SfU) 8. „ „ Social Affairs (SoU) „ Cultural Affairs (KrU) „ Education (UbU) „ Transport and Communications (TU) „ Agriculture (JoU) „ Industry (NU) „ Home Affairs (InU) and „ Physical Planning and Local Government (CU)
„ " 5. " If 7. ff )/ 9. /9 If /7

50

The Committees shall be elected in the order in which they are listed above. 4.2.2 If the Riksdag constitutes additional Committees primary terms of reference.

it shall state their

Art. 3. Each Committee shall consist of an uneven number of members, not less than fifteen.

Supplementary provision 4.3.1 Each Committee shall consist of fifteen members. Art. 4. The Committee on the Constitution shall, in addition to its assignment specified in Chapter 12, Article 1, of the Instrument of Government, prepare matters concerning the fundamental laws and the Riksdag Act. Art. 5. The Committee on Finance shall, in addition to its assignments specified in Chapter 8, Article 6, and Chapter 9, Article 4, of the Instrument of Government, prepare matters on general guidelines for the economic policy and for the final settlement of the budget as well as matters which concern the activities of the Bank of Sweden. The Committee on Taxation shall, in addition to its assignments specified in Chapter 8, Article 6, of the Instrument of Government, prepare matters concerning central government and local taxes. Art. 6. The Riksdag shall prescribe the principles according to which other matters shall be divided among the Committees. In this connection it shall be observed that matters falling within the same subject area shall be referred to one and the same Committee. It may be decided, however, that there shall be a Committee for the drafting of such laws as are referred to in Chapter 8, Article 2, of the Instrument of Government, irrespective of the subject area. The Riksdag can depart from the principles thus established, and also from Article 5, if this is found necessary in a particular case in view of the interdependence of different subjects, the particular nature of a matter or working conditions. Supplementary provisions 4.6.1 The Committee on the Constitution shall, in addition to its assign51

ments specified in Article 4, prepare matters concerning constitutional and general administrative law, matters on financial support to the press or political parties, legislation on radio, television and films as well as other questions which concern freedom of speech, the moulding of public opinion and the freedom of religion, other matters concerning the Riksdag, the Ombudsmen of the Riksdag, the organs of the Riksdag other than the Bank of Sweden, the National Debt Office and the Auditors of the Riksdag, matters concerning the consent of the Riksdag to prosecute a member of the Riksdag or impose limitations on his personal liberty and matters of general importance to local government. 4.6.2 The Committee on Finance shall, in addition to its assignments specified in the first paragraph of Article 5, prepare matters concerning estimates of public revenue and other matters related to the budget which do not fall within the jurisdiction of another Committee, budget procedure in general, matters on monetary credit and foreign exchange policies, on the National Debt Office and the Auditors of the Riksdag, on auditing of the administration, Government accounts and rationalization, on general public procurement, on Government property in general and other administrative economic matters which do not pertain solely to a specific subject area. It shall also compile the budget. 4.6.3 The Committee on Taxation shall, in addition to its assignments specified in the second paragraph of Article 5, prepare matters concerning tax assessment, collection of taxes and population registration as well as matters relating to products containing alcohol. 4.6.4 The Committee on Justice shall prepare matters which concern the courts, the leasing and rent tribunals, the public prosecution authorities, the police service and the correctional system, as well as matters pertaining to the Penal Code, the Code of Judicial Procedure and laws which replace, or are closely associated with, provisions contained in these Codes. 4.6.5 The Committee on Laws shall prepare matters concerning the Marriage Code, the Code on Parenthood and Guardianship, the Inheritance Code, the Commercial Code and the Code of Land Laws and laws which replace, or are related to provisions contained in these codes, in so far as these matters are not subject to preparation by another Committee. It shall also prepare matters which con52

cern legislation on insurance contract law, company law, association law, bills of exchange law, cheque law, law of tort liability, intellectual property law, debt recovery, bankruptcy, private international law as well as legislation in other questions of a general private-law nature. 4.6.6 The Committee on Foreign Affairs shall prepare matters concerning the relations and the agreements of the realm with other states and with international organizations, Sweden's representation abroad and assistance for the development of other countries as well as other questions concerning foreign trade and international economic co-operation, all in so far as these matters are not subject to preparation by another Committee. 4.6.7 The Committee on Defence shall prepare matters concerning military defence, civil defence, psychological defence, economic defence, non-combatant service and financial benefits to conscripts. 4.6.8 The Committee on Social Insurance shall prepare matters concerning national insurance and occupational injuries insurance as well as matters concerning financial aid to students. 4.6.9 The Committee on Social Affairs shall prepare matters concerning child and youth welfare, care of the elderly, welfare and treatment of alcoholics, public assistance, family allowances, occupational safety, working hours, vacations, health and medical services, care of the handicapped, rehabilitation and other matters of social welfare. 4.6.10 The Committee on Cultural Affairs shall prepare matters concerning culture in general as well as popular education, youth activities, international cultural co-operation as well as sport and open-air activities. It shall also prepare questions concerning ecclesiastical affairs and matters concerning radio and television in so far as these matters are not subject to preparation by the Committee on the Constitution. 4.6.11 The Committee on Education shall prepare matters concerning higher education and research, the school system, the training of teachers and adult education.
53

4.6.12 The Committee on Transport and Communications shall prepare matters concerning railways, postal services, telegraph services, telephone services, roads, road traffic, shipping, civil aviation and meteorological services. 4.6.13 The Committee on Agriculture shall prepare matters concerning agriculture, forestry, horticulture, game shooting, fishing and water rights. It shall also prepare matters on nature conservation and other matters concerning environmental management which are not subject to preparation by another Committee. 4.6.14 The Committee on Industry shall prepare matters concerning general guidelines for the industrial policy and research questions associated therewith and matters concerning industry and handicraft, commerce, state-owned enterprises, consumer questions, price conditions and restrictive trade practices in trade and industry, the banking and stock-exchange system, and commercial insurance activities. 4.6.15 The Committee on Home Affairs shall prepare matters concerning the labour market, regional development, location aid, compulsory service, employment contract law, unemployment insurance, working conditions and terms of employment in public service, Swedish citizenship and the status of aliens. 4.6.16 The Committee on Physical Planning and Local Government shall prepare matters concerning housing policy, rent control, town and country planning, building construction, physical planning, expropriation, real estate matters, land surveying, county administration including local taxation authorities and the executory authorities, statistics, fire services, and the administrative division of the realm as well as such local government questions which are not subject to preparation by the Committee on the Constitution. Art. 7. Any matter other than the budget proposition may be divided between two or more Committees only if necessitated by extraordinary circumstances. Art. 8. A Committee shall submit reports with regard to matters which have been referred to the Committee and have not been withdrawn. A Committee may, however, transfer a matter to another 54

Committee, if the latter consents thereto, or come to an agreement with one or more Committees that they shall prepare the matter jointly through representatives in a joint Committee. Such a Committee shall submit reports to the Riksdag. Reports on matters, the preparation of which has been postponed from one election period of the Riksdag to the next, shall be submitted by the Committee which has been appointed by the newly elected Riksdag. When reporting to the Chamber on pending decisions as referred to in Chapter 3, Article 16, the Committee shall attach a statement of opinion on the matter.

Supplementary provision 4.8.1 Decisions of the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation on matters referred to in Chapter 8, Article 6, of the Instrument of Government, shall be reported to the Government in written communications. Art. 9. A matter on which a Committee has submitted a report shall be remitted to the Committee from the Chamber for further consideration if at least one-third of those voting are in favour of so doing. Remittal according to this Article of one and the same matter may only be made once. The Chamber can also refer the matter to another Committee for further consideration. If there are simultaneous requests for this and for remitting the question, the latter request shall be considered first. If it is then decided to remit the matter, the request for referring the matter to another Committee lapses. Art. 10. A Government authority shall furnish information and state its opinion when so requested by a Committee. Such an obligation is not, however, incumbent upon the Government. Authorities which are not subordinate to the Riksdag can refer the request of a Committee to the Government for decision. If at least one-third of the members of a Committee, when considering a matter, requests that information and a statement of opinion shall be obtained from an authority such as referred to in the first paragraph, the Committee shall take such action, provided it does not find that the delay in dealing with the matter occasioned thereby would be of considerable detriment.
55

Art. 11. A Committee may convene also when a session is not in progress if its business so demands. Supplementary provisions 4.11.1 A Committee shall convene the first time on summons by the Speaker within two days after an election. Subsequent meetings of the Committee shall be convened by the Chairman. The Committee on Finance can convene also at the request of the Government for the purpose referred to in Chapter 9, Article 4, of the Instrument of Government. The Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation shall convene the first time at the request of the Government for the purpose referred to in Chapter 8, Article 6, of the Instrument of Government. If a Committee is to convene at the request of the Government, as mentioned above, the summons shall be issued by the Speaker. Summonses shall be issued personally to all members and deputies. If possible, summonses shall also be posted in the premises of the Riksdag not later than 6 p.m. the day before the meeting and published in one or more daily newspapers. 4.11.2 A Committee may convene at the same time as the Cham: only if the deliberations in the Chamber are concerned with matters other than the settlement of business or elections and the Committee has in advance consented thereto by unanimous decision. 4.11.3 Until the election of Chairman has been held, the member present who has been a member of the Riksdag for the longest period shall preside. If two or more members have been members of the Riksdag equally long, the one who is the senior in age shall take precedence. At a joint meeting of the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Taxation, according to Chapter 8, Article 6, of the Instrument of Government, the Chairman of the Committees who has been a member of the Riksdag for the longest period shall preside. If they have been members of the Riksdag equally long, the one who is the senior in age shall take precedence. 4.11.4 Minutes shall be kept of the Committee meetings. Art. 12. Committee meetings shall take place behind closed doors. If there are special reasons, a Committee can allow a person who is not a member, deputy or official of the Committee to be present. 56

Art. 13. No one may be present at a meeting of a Committee when matters which affect him personally, or someone closely associated with him, are being discussed or settled. Art. 14. Voting in a Committee shall be open. If the votes are evenly divided, the opinion which is supported by the Chairman shall prevail. A member who has lost in a Committee voting, can add to the report of the Committee his reservations together with motions. The Committee report must not, however, be delayed thereby. Art. 15. A member, a deputy or an official of a Committee must not unauthorizedly disclose any matters which the Government, or the Committee, have decided shall be kept secret for reasons of security of the realm or for other extremely important reasons, arising from relations with a foreign power or an international organization.

Chapter 5. THE DECISION OF BUSINESS Art. 1. A report of a Committee shall lie on the table at two meetings of the Chamber before the matter is decided upon, unless on the proposal of the Committee, the Riksdag decides that the matter shall be settled after having been tabled once only. Supplementary provisions 5.1.1 A Committee report shall not be reported to the Chamber until it has been distributed to the members of the Riksdag. 5.1.2 If, when a matter is to be decided, a member wishes to make a motion, which is not recorded in the Committee report, he shall inform the Speaker of this motion as soon as possible. Such a motion should be in writing and be distributed to the members before the matter is decided; in this motion the statement of reasons shall be omitted. Art. 1 Motions on declaration of no-confidence shall lie on the table of the Chamber until the second meeting after that when the motion was raised and shall be decided at the immediately succeeding meeting at the latest. 57

The foregoing provisions shall be correspondingly applicable to proposals by the Speaker on the appointment of a new Prime Minister. In this context the respite prescribed in Chapter 6, Article 2, second paragraph, of the Instrument of Government shall be observed.
Art. 3. Matters under discussion may not be finally decided upon

until the Chamber, on the proposal of the Speaker, has declared the debate concluded. A matter shall be decided by acclamation or, if requested by a member, by voting. If accession by a specified majority is required for a decision, the matter shall always be decided by voting. If necessary, a matter may be decided upon by making decisions on separate parts of the matter.
Art. 4. When a matter is to be decided by acclamation, the Speaker

shall put to question each motion made during the deliberation. The question should be worded so that it can be answered by "yes" or "no". The Speaker shall announce what the result of the decision is in his opinion, and confirm it by a fall of the mallet, unless voting is requested.
Art. 5. When a matter is to be decided by voting, another motion

shall be put as counter-proposal to the motion which, in the Speaker's opinion, has won the approval of the Riksdag, or, when acclamation has not taken place, to the motion decided by the Speaker. If there are more than two motions which can contend it shall first be decided, by application of Article 4, which motion shall be the counter-proposal. Division shall be open. The Speaker shall announce the result of the division and confirm the decision by a fall of the mallet.
Supplementary provisions

5.5.1 When a division is to be taken the Speaker shall draw up a proposal to be voted upon. If, in certain cases, accession by a specified majority is required, this shall be stated in the proposal to be voted upon. When, after due warning, the members have taken their seats in the Assembly Hall, the proposal to be voted upon shall be read and put before the Chamber for approval. A division can be taken by members rising from their seats. If the Speaker finds that such a procedure leaves doubt about the result 58

of the division or a member requests the counting of votes, a new division shall be carried out by the vote-recording machine or, when such cannot be used, by a roll-call. 5.5.2 At a division taken by members rising, the Speaker shall first call on those members who wish to vote "yes" to rise and thereafter make the same call to the members who wish to vote "no" to the proposal. At a division by vote-recording machine, the record panel showing how each member has voted shall be photographed. At a division by roll-call, the Speaker shall call upon two members to take a seat at the Speaker's table to keep record of the division. The Deputy Speakers shall be called first and thereafter other members in the order of the number of their seats in the Assembly Hall. One of the following answers shall be given: "yes", "no", "abstain". Art. 6. If at a division votes are equally divided as to which motion shall be the counter-proposal, the question shall be decided by the drawing of a lot. If votes are equally divided at a principal division the Speaker shall put the proposal to the Chamber that the matter be returned to the Committee. The matter shall be returned if at least one half of those voting support the proposal. If it is decided not to return the matter to the Committee the opinion of the Riksdag shall be that determined by the drawing of a lot. After having been returned, the question shall be put to the Chamber again in its entirety for decision. If voting is again equally divided at the principal division, the lot-drawing procedure shall be resorted to at once. Art. 7. If the settlement of a legislative matter has been divided into two or more decisions, the Riksdag may, on the proposal of the Speaker or a member, decide immediately after the last partial decision that the matter shall be returned to the Committee for further examination. If the Riksdag decides that the matter shall be returned, the partial decisions become void. Decisions on the return of matters to Committees coming under this Article may not be made more than once. Art. 8. If accession by a specified majority is required for a decision and there is more than one proposed decision, the Riksdag shall first select one of the proposals on the basis of rules generally
7-740488

59

in force. It shall then be decided if this proposal shall be approved or rejected. If there are simultaneously two or more motions on declaration of no-confidence against the same Minister, only one vote shall be taken. Art. 9. A member may make reservation immediately after a decision has been taken or give an explanation of his vote. Art. 10. The Riksdag can by special decision postpone the consideration of a matter to the next ordinary session. A matter which concerns the budget for the coming fiscal year may only be postponed, however, if this can be done without disadvantage to the final settlement of the budget. Decisions on postponements can be repeated. If an ordinary session is terminated prematurely due to an extra election, matters which the Riksdag has not had time to decide upon shall be considered postponed, without a special decision, to the first ordinary session after the election. Matters which have not been withdrawn shall be decided before the expiry of the calendar year following the year the matters were raised or, if this is prevented by the proclamation to hold an extra election, as soon as possible after the newly elected Riksdag has convened. Supplementary provision 5.10.1 Decision to postpone matters shall be taken at the request of the Committee dealing with the matter. The Committee shall obtain the opinion of the Speaker's Conference. The Chamber may also, without such a request having been made, decide on postponement when considering a Committee report. Art. 11. The Riksdag can at an extraordinary session decide to consider a postponed matter. Supplementary provision 5.11.1 A decision at an extraordinary session to consider a postponed matter shall be reached on the basis of a proposal made by the Committee dealing with the matter or by the Speaker. The Speaker's Conference shall be consulted on the matter. 60

Art. 12. A final decision on matters concerning the fundamental laws shall be reached at the first session during the election period following the elections to the Riksdag immediately after the pending decision has been reached on the matter, unless the decision is postponed to another session. As regards postponement, the provisions of Article 10 first and second paragraph and Article 11 shall be correspondingly applicable. Such a matter shall be finally decided before the next general elections to the Riksdag. Supplementary provision 5.12.1 The supplementary provisions 5.10.1 and 5.11.1 shall be correspondingly applicable as regards the postponement of matters concerning fundamental laws. Art. 13. Decisions reached by the Riksdag on propositions as well as decisions of other nature, of which the Government shall be informed, shall be communicated to the Government in writing Supplementary provision 5.13.1 The written communications of the Riksdag shall be prepared by the Secretariat of the Chamber and signed by the Speaker. The Committee which has prepared a matter shall be informed of the Chamber's decision on that matter.

Chapter 6. INTERPELLATIONS AND QUESTIONS TO MINISTERS Art. 1. Interpellations shall deal with a specific subject and shall include a statement of reason. Interpellations should be made only in respect of matters of broader public interest. The Riksdag shall decide if an interpellation may be made. The decision shall be reached without previous discussion. A Minister who does not answer an interpellation within four weeks of the date the Riksdag gave permission for the interpellation to be made shall, before the expiry of this period, verbally inform the Riksdag of the reason why no answer has been given or has been deferred. Such a communication may not be followed by deliberations. An interpellation becomes invalid if it is not answered during the session when it was made. 61

Supplementary provisions 6.1.1 An interpellation shall be filed with the Secretariat of the Chamber and shall be reported by the Speaker at a meeting of the Chamber as soon as possible after the interpellation has been distributed to the members of the Riksdag. The question as to whether an interpellation may be made shall be decided at the immediately following meeting and shall be included on the agenda for that meeting. If the Riksdag grants permission for the interpellation to be made, the Speaker shall without delay pass it on to the Minister concerned. Any member who at a session, which shall be prorogued on May 31 at the latest according to Chapter 1, Article 4, files an interpellation with the Secretariat of the Chamber after the expiry of the month of April shall state in the interpellation the reasons why it has not been filed earlier. 6.1.2 When a Minister intends to answer an interpellation, the Speaker shall, after consultation with the Minister and the interpellator, decide at which meeting the reply shall be given. Notification to the effect that the interpellation will be answered shall be posted at the latest at 11 a.m. the day before the meeting and shall be included on the agenda. Answers to interpellations may be distributed to members in advance. If the answer has been distributed, the Minister can confine his statement to a summary of the answer. Art. 2. A question shall deal with a specific subject. It may include a brief introductory explanation. When a question is answered, only the member who has put the question and the Minister who gives the answer may take part in the discussion. The Riksdag can impose limits on the right of utterance pertaining to these speakers over and above the limits prescribed in Chapter 2, Article 14. Supplementary provisions 6.2.1 A question shall be filed with the Secretariat of the Chamber. The member who puts the question shall sign it with his own hand. The Speaker shall without delay forward the question to the Minister concerned and report it at the next meeting. 6.2.2 The provisions of the third paragraph of Article 1 and of the first 62

paragraph of supplementary provision 6.1.2 shall be correspondingly applicable also to a question. Unless there are special reasons for proceeding otherwise, questions shall be answered at one or two question periods each week. A question should be answered during the first question period six days after the date when the question was filed with the Secretariat of the Chamber. When a question is answered, the first speech of each member may not last for more than three minutes, the second not more than two minutes and each subsequent speech not more than one minute.

Chapter 7.

GENERAL PROVISIONS ON ELECTIONS IN THE RIKSDAG Art. 1. The provisions of Articles 2-12 apply to elections which
are the concern of the Chamber. The provisions of Article 2, first paragraph, Article 6, Articles 8-10 and the second paragraph of Article 12 shall be applied only inasmuch as the Riksdag has not prescribed otherwise.

Supplementary provision
7.1.1 In addition to the elections which the Chamber shall hold according to the Instrument of Government and the Riksdag Act it shall elect 1. the Commissioners of the National Debt Office, 2. the Board of the Riksdag Library, 3. the Swedish Delegation to the Nordic Council, 4. the Swedish Delegation to the Council of Europe, 5. the Board of the Foundation for the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Fund.

The Chamber shall also each year appoint eighteen members of the Riksdag who may take part in the annual general meetings of Statsforetag AB (Swedish National Enterprises Inc.). Art. 2. Elections shall be prepared by an Election Committee selected among the members of the Riksdag. The Election Committee shall be appointed at the first meeting of the Chamber during the election period of the Riksdag for a term ending at the expiration of the election period. Each party group, representative of a party with not less than four per cent of the national vote at the immediately preceding election to the Riksdag, 63

shall hold one seat on the Election Committee. In addition thereto, ten seats shall be distributed proportionally between the same party groups. The members shall be appointed according to the procedure described in the first paragraph of Article 12.

Supplementary provisions 7.2.1 The Speaker shall determine the number of members each party group may appoint to the Election Committee. When so doing he shall determine the proportional distribution according to the calculation principles given in the second paragraph of Article 4. 7.2.2 The Election Committee shall prepare all elections which are held by the Chamber with the exception of the election of Regent, Deputy Regent, person who shall hold the office of Temporary Regent, the Speaker, Deputy Speakers, the Clerk of the Chamber or the Parliamentary Ombudsmen and their deputies. Provisions concerning the preparation of the election of Ombudsmen and deputies are given in the supplementary provision 8.10.2. 7.2.3 When summoned by the Speaker, the Election Committee shall hold its first meeting on the same day it is appointed. Subsequent meetings of the Committee shall be convened by its chairman. The provisions of Chapter 4, Article 12, as well as the supplementary provisions 4.11.1, second paragraph, and 4.11.2-4 shall be correspondingly applicable to the Election Committee. Art. 3. If at an election of two or more persons, a common list is presented which contains the names of as many persons as are to be elected, and if the list has been approved by all the members participating in the meeting of the Election Committee, or by all but one member, the Speaker shall put the question that the list be approved and declare the listed persons elected. Election by secret ballot shall be held, however, if requested by at least a number of members of the Riksdag equal to the number obtained if the number of all members entitled to vote is divided by the number of persons to be elected, plus one. This election shall take place at a later meeting. If special provisions prescribe that the holder of specific assignment shall be elected separately, the election shall be held by acclamation. However, if so requested by a member the election shall be 64

held by secret ballot. If unanimously proposed by the Election Committee, the election shall take place at a later meeting. Art. 4. Elections shall be held by secret ballot unless otherwise prescribed in Article 3 or in other principal provisions of the Riksdag Act. If two or more persons are to be appointed by secret ballot, the seats shall be allocated proportionally between the parties. In this context, a party is understood to be each group of members of the Riksdag taking part in an election under a specific appellation. The distribution of seats between the parties shall be done by allocating seats one by one to the party which each time records the highest comparison figure. The comparison figure is equal to the number of votes gained by a party as long as the party has not been allocated a seat, and is thereafter obtained by dividing the number of votes gained by a party by the number of seats already allocated to the party, increased by one. When the comparison figure is equal, the allocation shall be made by lot.

Supplementary provisions

7.4.1 The ballot papers shall be of the same size, material and colour. A ballot paper shall be a single sheet, sealed and unmarked. It may contain particulars of the election to which it applies. A ballot paper shall be invalid if it is marked with distinctive signs which obviously have been purposely affixed to the ballot paper or if it is devoid of the names of valid candidates. If a member has submitted more than one ballot paper at an election the ballot papers shall be invalid. However, if the ballot papers are identical, one ballot paper shall be considered valid at the count. A name on a ballot paper shall be regarded as non-existent if the candidate is not eligible for election, if the name is crossed out or if there is any doubt as to whom the name refers. 7.4.2 At proportional elections ballot papers shall be used on which the party denomination (name of the party or other appellation in written words for a certain group of members of the Riksdag or for a specific body of opinion) is printed before the names of candidates. The names shall be listed consecutively, one below the other. A ballot paper shall be invalid if it lacks a party denomination or contains more than one party denomination. A name on a ballot paper shall be regarded as non-existent if the
65

order of priority between that name and another name is not clearly evident. The seats which have been allocated to a party shall be occupied in such a way that the first seat gained by the party is given to the person whose name is first on the party list, the second seat to the person whose name is second on the list and so on, according to the same principle. When the order of priority among the names on the ballot papers of a party shall be determined, Chapter 14, Article 6, of the Electoral Law (Swedish Code of Statutes 1972:620) shall apply accordingly. 7.4.3 When electing a person by secret ballot, the ballot paper must not contain the party denomination. A ballot paper containing the names of two or more candidates shall be invalid. When votes are equally divided, the election shall be determined by the drawing of a lot. 7.4.4 At an election by secret ballot the Speaker shall call upon five members to take their places at the Speaker's table. Three of these shall assist at the opening and examination of the ballot papers and the other two record the result of the election. Roll-call shall be carried out in the manner prescribed in the supplementary provision 5.5.2. When the name of a member is called he shall proceed to the Speaker's table and deliver his ballot paper to the Speaker. When all the approved ballot papers have been read out by the Speaker and recorded by the Clerk of the Chamber and the two members, the records of the election shall be compared. When the result of the election has been established it shall be immediately announced by the Speaker. 7.4.5 If two or more elections by secret ballot shall be held, the Speaker may determine, unless a member requests another procedure, that the ballot papers for all the elections shall be delivered before the votes of any of the elections are counted. Art. 5. Appeals against elections by secret ballot may be lodged with the Election Review Committee of the Riksdag. The election shall be valid notwithstanding that an appeal has been lodged against it.
66

Supplementary provisions 7.5.1 Appeals against an election as referred to in Article 5 are to be lodged with the Election Review Committee. The appeal documents shall be delivered to the Secretariat of the Chamber within five days of the day the result of the election was announced in the Chamber. As soon as the term of appeal has expired, the Speaker shall report at a meeting of the Chamber all the appeals which have been lodged. The Speaker shall then specify a brief period during which statements giving reasons for the appeals shall have been submitted to the Election Review Committee. When the term for submitting explanatory statements has expired the Speaker shall immediately send the appeal documents to the Election Review Committee. In addition thereto, the Speaker should promptly submit his opinion on the appeals to the Election Review Committee. 7.5.2 If the provisions of Article 4 or of the supplementary provisions 7.4.1-5 have been disregarded at an election and it is not improbable that the error has affected the result of the election, the Election Review Committee shall annul the election and order a new election. However, if the error can be remedied by a new count of votes or by any other less radical measure, the Election Review Committee shall instead instruct the Speaker to make the necessary rectification. 7.5.3 Ballot papers and other material relating to an election shall be kept in safe custody until the election has become final. Art. 6. An election which, according to specially prescribed provisions, shall refer to a period corresponding to the election period of the Riksdag, shall be held as soon as possible after the beginning of the election period and shall apply until the Riksdag holds a new election during the next election period. Art. 7. If a new member has taken a seat in the Riksdag in consequence of the result of an election to the Riksdag being changed after appeals, an election which the Riksdag has held before that time during the election period shall be held again if this is requested by at least ten members of the Riksdag. Art. 8. If two or more are to be elected at least as many deputies as ordinary members shall be appointed. The provisions relating to ordinary members shall apply correspondingly to deputies.

67

Supplementary provisions 7.8.1 After the Riksdag has held elections to a body and has then appointed deputies pursuant to Article 8, it can decide to increase the number of deputies in the body. The election of deputies necessitated hereby shall be held as soon as possible. 7.8.2 Unless otherwise prescribed or specially decided, as many deputies as ordinary members shall be appointed. Art. 9. If a member of a body, who has been elected by the Riksdag, is unavoidably absent, his place shall, if possible, be taken by a deputy belonging to the same party group. In other respects, the deputies shall take precedence in the order in which they have been elected or, if a common list was used in the election, in the order their names have been listed. Supplementary provision 7.9.1 A member or deputy who has been elected by two or more groups shall be considered to be elected by the group from which he first obtained a seat. Art. 10. If an assignment can only be filled by a member of the Riksdag and the person elected leaves the Riksdag, or is appointed Speaker of the Riksdag, or made a Minister, he shall resign from the assignment. Art. 11. Anyone elected by the Riksdag to fulfil a special assignment may not decline the assignment without the permission of the Riksdag. Art. 12. If anyone who has been elected to a body leaves his assignment prematurely and if the election, by which the assignment was filled at the beginning of the term of office, concerned two or more persons, the party group, or the party groups, he represented shall notify the Speaker of the name of a successor. The Speaker shall; declare the person notified elected. If such a notification is not given! or if such notification includes the name of more than one person the Speaker shall appoint a successor. If a post becomes prematurely vacant, for a reason other thar that specified in the first paragraph, a supplementary election shal 68

be held to cover the remaining period according to general provisions governing such procedures. Art. 13. A body whose members are wholly or partly selected by the Chamber shall elect from among its members a chairman and one or more vice-chairmen, unless otherwise prescribed. Art. 14. Elections in a body, as referred to in Article 13, shall be held by acclamation or, if requested by a member, by secret ballot. Supplementary provision 7.14.1 'The ballot papers shall all be of the same size, material and colour. A ballot paper shall be single, sealed and unmarked. When votes are equally divided, the election shall be decided by the drawing of a lot. Chapter 8. CERTAIN OFFICIALS AND BODIES Art. 1. Elections of a Speaker and a First, Second and Third Deputy Speaker shall be held at the first meeting of the Chamber during the election period of the Riksdag and shall be valid until the end of the election period. The Speakers shall be elected separately in the order named above. If the election is carried out by secret ballot the candidate who receives more than half of the votes is elected. Should such a majority not be attained a new election shall be carried out. Should then no candidate receive more than half of the votes cast, a third election shall be held between the two candidates who attained the highest number of votes at the second election. The person receiving most votes at the third election is elected. Art. 2. The Riksdag shall hold a special election to appoint a deputy for the chairman of the Election Review Committee of the Riksdag. The provisions of Chapter 3, Article 11, of the Instrument of Government concerning the chairman shall apply correspondingly to the deputy. When a chairman or his deputy are elected by secret ballot the procedure prescribed in the second paragraph of Article 1 shall be followed. Art. 3. At elections by secret ballot of Regent, Deputy Regent, or of a person who shall hold the office of Temporary Regent, the procedure prescribed in the second paragraph of Article 1 shall be followed. The election results shall be valid until the Riksdag decides otherwise.
69

Art. 4. The Committee on Salaries of the Riksdag shall consist of seventeen members elected by the Riksdag for the election period of the Riksdag. Art. 5. The meetings of the Committee on Salaries shall take place behind closed doors. If there are special reasons, the Committee may allow the presence of a person who is not a member, deputy, official of the Committee or of a person whom the Committee wishes to consult on matters of negotiations. The provisions of Chapter 4, Article 11 and Article 14, first paragraph, shall apply correspondingly to the Committee. A member who has declared himself at variance with a decision of the Committee may register his dissent. Before agreement on a matter of negotiation has been concluded or negotiations have otherwise been completed, or a proposal as specified in Chapter 9, Article 11, of the Instrument of Government has been presented to the Committee, a member, deputy or official may not, without permission of the Committee, disclose any detail of the discussion of the Committee on the matter.

Supplementary provisions 8.5.1 In matters of negotiations concerning terms of employment for employees of the Riksdag and its authorities, the Committee on Salaries shall consult with the Speaker or with another member of the Board of Administration of the Riksdag appointed by the Board. 8.5.2 The supplementary provisions 4.11.1-4 shall apply correspondingly to the Committee on Salaries. 8.5.3 The Committee on Salaries shall present to the Riksdag before January 15 each year a report of its activities during the preceding year. Agreements and other documents which have been submitted to the Committee for approval shall be attached to the report. 8.5.4 The first time a member, a deputy or an official attends a meeting of the Committee, he shall give an assurance that he will observe the rules of secrecy. 70

8.5.5 The Committee on Salaries shall appoint its own secretary.

Art. 6. The election of Commissioners of the Bank of Sweden is
for the electoral term of the Riksdag. The Commissioners shall elect one of their number to be Governor of the Bank of Sweden and also from, or outside, their number one to be Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden. If this latter is not a Commissioner, he shall be a special deputy to the Governor of the Bank of Sweden on the Board of Commissioners and in that capacity take precedence of all other deputies in serving on the Board.

Art. 7. The election of members of the Foreign Affairs Advisory
Council is for the election period of the Riksdag. A Deputy Speaker may deputize for the Speaker in the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council. The number of elected deputy members shall be nine.

Art. 8. The meetings of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council shall
take place behind closed doors. The Prime Minister may allow a person other than a member, deputy, Minister or official to be present.

Supplementary provision 8.8.1 The supplementary provisions 4.11.4 and 8.5.4 shall apply correspondingly to the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council. The Government shall appoint the Secretary of the Council. A deputy member of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council shall always be kept informed of the meetings of the Council.
Art. 9. For purposes referred to in Chapter 13, Article 2, of the

Instrument of Government meetings of the Foreign Affairs Advisory Council shall be convened by the Speaker or, in his unavoidable absence, by a Deputy Speaker, or if summoned by two other members of the Council. Proceedings shall be conducted by the Speaker, by a Deputy Speaker or, if none of them is present, by the member present who has been a member of the Riksdag for the longest period. If two or more members have been members of the Riksdag equally long, the one who is the senior in age shall take precedence. If, when voting on a decision, the votes are equally divided, the
71

opinion which is supported by the Chairman shall be considered to be the decision of the Council.

Art. 10. An Ombudsman is elected for a term commencing at his
election until a new election is held during the fourth year after his election. However, if requested by the Committee which examines the annual report of the administration of the Ombudsman's office, the Riksdag can discharge him before the expiry of his term if he does not enjoy the confidence of the Riksdag. When electing an Ombudsman by secret ballot the procedure prescribed in the second paragraph of Article 1 shall be followed. If an Ombudsman leaves before the expiry of his term of office, the Riksdag shall as soon as possible elect a successor for a new four-year term. The Riksdag shall elect one or more persons to serve in the place of an Ombudsman. The provisions of the first and second paragraphs concerning an Ombudsman shall apply correspondingly to a deputy.

Supplementary provisions 8.10.1 The Committee on the Constitution shall, within twenty days of the day it is appointed, select a delegation — Delegation for the Parliamentary Ombudsmen — consisting of six members of the Committee, for the purpose of consulting with an Ombudsman about the rules of procedure or other matters of an organizational nature when the Ombudsman of the Riksdag so requests. 8.10.2 The election of an Ombudsman and his deputy shall be prepared by the Delegation for the Parliamentary Ombudsmen, which shall for this purpose consult with the members of the Speaker's Conference who have been selected by the party groups. Art. 11. There shall be twelve auditors of the Riksdag. They shall be elected for the election period of the Riksdag. The Riksdag shall elect a chairman and one or more vice-chairmen from among the auditors. The chairman and each vice-chairman shall be elected separately. Art. 12. The War Delegation of the Riksdag shall consist of the Speaker as chairman and of fifty other members, elected by the Riksdag for the election period of the Riksdag. 72

A member of the Riksdag shall be eligible to be a member of the War Delegation notwithstanding his being a member of the Government. Deputy members shall not be appointed to the War Delegation. If a member will be permanently absent when the War Delegation has replaced the Riksdag, another member of the Riksdag shall be selected as a replacement in the order of priority given in Chapter 7, Article 12, first paragraph. Supplementary provisions 8.12.1 It shall be incumbent on the chairman and vice-chairman of the War Delegation to prepare the activities of the Delegation in the event of the Delegation replacing the Riksdag. 8.12.2 The provisions of Chapter 4, Article 12, the second paragraph of the supplementary provision 4.11.1, and the supplementary provisions 4.11.2 and 4.11.4 shall apply correspondingly to the War Delegation at times when the Delegation is not acting in place of the Riksdag. Art. 13. The Riksdag can issue further provisions concerning the organs of the Riksdag. Chapter 9. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PERSONNEL AND ADMINISTRATION Art. 1. The Chamber shall appoint a Clerk of the Chamber. The election of a Clerk of the Chamber shall be held at the beginning of the session immediately after a general election to the Riksdag and shall be valid for the period until a new election of Clerk of the Chamber is held. The Clerk of the Chamber shall keep the minutes at meetings of the Chamber. He shall issue notifications of the decisions of the Riksdag and in other ways assist the Speaker with the business of the Riksdag. Supplementary provisions 9.1.1 At an election of a Clerk of the Chamber by secret ballot, the procedure which is prescribed in Chapter 8, Article 1, second paragraph, shall be applied. 73

9.1.2 The Clerk of the Chamber shall be in charge of the Secretariat of the Chamber, and is secretary to the War Delegation. He shall keep the minutes at meetings of the Speaker's Conference. Art. 2. The Committees are assisted by secretaries. The Principal Secretary of a Committee shall be a Swedish citizen. Art. 3. The Office of Administration and Services of the Riksdag shall be managed by the Board of Administration of the Riksdag. The Board shall consist of the Speaker as Chairman and eight other members who are elected by the Riksdag from among its members for the election period of the Riksdag. According to further provisions issued by the Riksdag, the Board can also include a maximum of three staff representatives. Art. 4. The Office of Administration and Services of the Riksdag shall, in so far as the Riksdag and the authorities of the Riksdag are concerned, to the extent decided by the Riksdag 1. deal with questions concerning negotiations on terms of employment and working conditions for employees as well as other personnel matters, 2. issue general administrative regulations, 3. prepare proposals on appropriations from the Government budget. The Office of Administration and Services shall in other respects, and in accordance with further provisions issued by the Riksdag, deal with questions concerning the administration of the Riksdag and questions concerning the financial administration of the authorities of the Riksdag with the exception of the Bank of Sweden and the special authority referred to in Chapter 9, Article 10, second paragraph, of the Instrument of Government. Art. 5. Appeals against decisions of the organs of the Riksdag in administrative matters, which may be lodged in accordance with the provisions concerning such procedure, shall be considered by the Supreme Administrative Court in cases which are especially decided by the Riksdag, and in other cases by the Board of Appeal of the Riksdag. The Board of Appeal shall consist of a chairman, who holds or has held a judicial office and is not a member of the Riksdag, and four other members elected from among the members of the Riksdag. The chairman shall be elected separately. The election of the Board of Appeal shall refer to the election period of the Riksdag. There shall be a deputy for the chairman. The provisions con74

cerning the election of a chairman shall apply correspondingly to the election of a deputy. Supplementary provision 9.5.1 When a chairman of the Board of Appeal is elected by secret ballot, the procedure given in Chapter 8, Article 1, second paragraph, shall be followed. Art. 6. A member of the Riksdag shall be entitled to remuneration for his assignment from public funds. Stipulations governing such matters, other financial benefits arising out of the assignment as well as remuneration paid to a deputy for a member of the Riksdag shall be prescribed by law. Art. 7. Special provisions govern the access of the members and organs of the Riksdag to the Library and assistance to them in obtaining factual material for their work in the Riksdag as well as the study tours of the Committees and the members of the Riksdag.

Supplementary provision 9.7.1 A Committee may decide that representatives of the Committee shall undertake study tours in order to procure information on a subject within the field with which the Committee is concerned. A Committee shall consult with the Speaker's Conference before it takes a decision on a study tour abroad. The Speaker's Conference shall express its opinion on whether it is appropriate to undertake the tour. In such a matter account shall be taken of the Riksdag's international relations, of the costs and of other circumstances. The Speaker's Conference can issue further instructions concerning study tours of Committees. A member of the Riksdag can be granted an allowance for an individual study tour. The Speaker's Conference can issue further instructions concerning such tours. Art. 8. Legal proceedings against an official stated below for an offence committed in the execution of his assignment or duties, may be decided, 1. legal proceedings against a Commissioner of the Bank of Sweden or any of the Auditors of the Riksdag by the Committee on Finance only, 2. legal proceedings against a member of the Board of Administration of the Riksdag, of the Election Review Com5-740488

75

mittee, and of the Board of Appeal of the Riksdag or against an Ombudsman of the Riksdag or the Clerk of the Chamber by the Committee on the Constitution only. The Riksdag can direct that the provisions of the first paragraph on a decision to institute legal proceedings against a Commissioner of the Bank of Sweden shall not be applied in respect of an offence committed in dealing with a question concerning the import or export of foreign currency.

Supplementary provisions 9.8.1 The provisions of the first paragraph of Article 8, concerning decisions to prosecute a Commissioner of the Bank of Sweden, shall not be applied in respect of an offence committed in the execution of the Bank of Sweden's decision-making rights under the Exchange Control Act (Swedish Code of Statutes 1939:350). 9.8.2 Special provisions govern the right to take legal proceedings against other officials than those mentioned in Article 8. INTERIM PROVISIONS

1.
By this Riksdag Act the former Riksdag Act is repealed. The former Riksdag Act shall be applied, however, with the exceptions stated below, in lieu of the new Riksdag Act until the end of that calendar year during which the Riksdag finally adopts the new Instrument of Government and, in such cases as are stated below, also thereafter.

2.
The provision of Article 5, first paragraph, second sentence, of the former Riksdag Act and the provisions of Article 34, first paragraph, first and second sentences, and the third paragraph of the same Riksdag Act shall be applied as long as Gustaf VI Adolf is King, in lieu of the corresponding provisions in this Riksdag Act, the provisions of Article 34 concerning ordinary sessions. The provisions of Article 14 of the former Riksdag Act concerning the right to vote at elections to the Riksdag shall be applied as prescribed in the provisions of 2, second paragraph, second sentence, of the Interim Provisions of the Instrument of Government. Provisions are laid down in 2, third paragraph, of the Interim Provisions of the Instrument of Government on the application of 76

provisions contained in Chapter 3 of the new Instrument of Government and in other laws instead of the corresponding provisions in the former Riksdag Act concerning elections to the Riksdag which are held before the date on which the former Riksdag Act shall cease to be applicable under 1 above. Nor shall the provisions of the former Riksdag Act be applied concerning the issue and examination of warrants of election in respect of such elections. When, as a result of the election, the Riksdag convenes before the time mentioned above, the provisions of this Riksdag Act given in Chapter 1, Article 5, first paragraph, Articles 8 and 9, with supplementary provisions, and Chapter 8, Article 12, second paragraph, as well as the provisions of the first paragraph of the last mentioned Article, concerning the composition of the War Delegation of the Riksdag, shall be applied. In respect of such a Riksdag the provisions of Article 53, second paragraph, of the former Riksdag Act shall apply to every member of the Government. The provisions of Chapter 5, Article 8, first paragraph, of this Riksdag Act shall apply in respect of such proposals concerning amendments of the Riksdag Act which the Riksdag deliberates before the time stated under 1 above. 3. The ordinary session shall during the year when the new Riksdag Act enters into force according to 1, begin on January 10 or that day before which is prescribed in the provisions of Chapter 3 of the new Instrument of Government concerning the first meeting of the Riksdag after an extra election. No decision may be taken to postpone the prorogation of the Riksdag to a day after December 31 as provided for by the sixth paragraph of Article 2 of the former Riksdag Act. The provisions prescribed in this Riksdag Act, concerning ordinary sessions beginning in August, September or October, shall apply to an ordinary session such as that referred to in the first paragraph. 4 Elections held by the Riksdag which, according to a special provision, shall apply to a period corresponding to the election period of the Riksdag, shall take place at the beginning of the session stated under 3 and shall be relevant to the remaining part of the election period. Thus, corresponding terms of office which, according to the former provisions, would continue after the turn of the year are no longer applicable. The Speaker and the Deputy Speakers of the Riksdag which shall be prorogued at the turn of the year as stated under 1, shall remain in office until the beginning of an ordinary session according to 3. 77

Provisions are laid down in 2 of the Interim Provisions of the Instrument of Government concerning the election of members and deputies of the Election Review Committee.
5.

At the Riksdag which is prorogued at the turn of the year stated under 1, the consideration of a matter, according to the third paragraph of Article 58 of the former Riksdag Act, can be postponed to an ordinary session as specified under 3 above. Decisions on a matter which has been postponed shall be taken within the time stipulated in Chapter 5, Article 10, of this Riksdag Act. If the decision on a pending draft of a fundamental law has been postponed, by virtue of Article 64 of the former Riksdag Act, beyond the time stated under 1 above, the matter shall be considered at the ordinary session referred to under 3 above. The provisions of Chapter 5, Article 12, of this Riksdag Act prescribes how the continued consideration of the matter shall be conducted.
6.

The right to take legal proceedings against an official for a committed offence, as stated in Chapter 9, Article 8, of this Riksdag Act, shall be governed by previous laws if, when the act was carried out, the right to take such proceedings was subject to conditions then prevailing which have not been taken into consideration in this Riksdag Act.
7.

If there are provisions in laws or other statutes which refer to Riksdag sessions or otherwise to periods during which the Riksdag meets, the provisions shall instead apply to sessions. 8. The second paragraph of the Interim Provisions of the Ordinance (Swedish Code of Statutes 1971:2) concerning resolved amendments to the Instrument of Government and the Riksdag Act shall still

CARL GUSTAF Lennart Geijer (Ministry of Justice)

78

THE ACT OF SUCCESSION
according to which the male heirs begotten by His Noble-Born Highness, the chosen Crown Prince of the realm of Sweden, HRH Prince JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS of Ponte-Corvo, shall have the right to the Royal Swedish throne and to accede to the government of Sweden. Orebro, September 26, 1810, as amended up to and including the year 1974. We CARL, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, the Goths, and the Wends, &eff., &eff., &eff., Heir to Norway, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein, Stormarn and Ditmarsen, Count of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, &ef ., &ef ., hereby make known that We, after the unanimous acceptance and confirmation by the Estates of the Realm of the Act of Succession according to which the male heirs begotten by His Noble Born Highness, the chosen Crown Prince of Sweden, HRH Prince JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS shall have the right to the Swedish throne and to accede to the government of Sweden, and after the submission of this fundamental law for Our gracious approval, by virtue of the right accruing to Us according to Article 85 of the Instrument of Government, adopt, accept and confirm this Act of Succession approved by the Estates of the Realm exactly as follows word for word: ACT OF SUCCESSION, according to which the male heirs begotten by His Noble-Born Highness, the chosen Crown Prince of Sweden, HRH Prince JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS of Ponte-Corvo, shall have the right to the Royal Swedish throne and to accede to the government of Sweden; adopted and confirmed by the King and the Estates of the Realm at the extraordinary session of the Riksdag in Orebro on September 26, 1810. We, the undersigned Estates of the Realm of Sweden, counts, barons, bishops, nobility, clergy, burghers and peasants, who are 79

now convened at a general extraordinary session of the Riksdag here in Orebro, hereby make known that, with the decease, without male heirs begotten by him, of His Noble-Born Highness, the chosen Crown Prince of Sweden, HRH Prince CARL AUGUST, and by our choice, as evidenced by the Act of Agreement and Election of August 21, 1810, of His Noble-Born Highness, Prince JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS of Ponte-Corvo, as Crown Prince of Sweden, to succeed to the government of Sweden and its subordinate provinces His Royal Majesty, our present most gracious King and Lord, Carl XIII, after his death (be it long deferred by the Grace of God the Almighty) to be crowned and hailed as King of Sweden, and to govern the realm, on the conditions specified in the Act of Agreement and Election above mentioned as well as in the royal oath to be made, as required by us, by His Noble-Born Highness, we have this day determined and confirmed for the legitimate direct male heirs of HRH JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS, Prince of PonteCorvo, the following order of succession to the crown and government of Sweden, applicable in the manner and on the conditions expressedly set forth below. Art. 1. Since the marriage of HRH Crown Prince JOHAN BAPTIST JULIUS is already blessed with a male heir begotten by him, and since it may yet be blessed by other such heirs, the rule shall apply that the eldest son of His Royal Highness shall succeed His Royal Highness in the government, and after the eldest son his male descendants in the order of nearness of kin, in direct line of descent, in relation to the head of the family. If there are no male heirs in the oldest branch of the family the next oldest son of His Royal Highness shall accede to the government, and after the next oldest son his male descendants in the order prescribed above with regard to the oldest branch of the family, that is, according to nearness of kin, in direct line of descent, in relation to the head of the family. If there are no male heirs in the next oldest branch of the family the third son and his branch of the family shall have the right of succession, thereafter the fourth and so forth in the same order, and in direct line of descent in accordance with the principle of primogeniture, as prescribed above with regard to the oldest branch of the family. Art. 2. If at the death of a King in Sweden there is no male heir begotten by him, but the Queen is in a blessed state, the regent or the Council of State shall conduct the government with royal power and authority, in the manner and on the conditions prescribed in Articles 41 and 93 of the Instrument of Government, until the time 80

when the Riksdag shall convene in accordance with the Instrument of Government, at which time the Riksdag shall make necessary provisions concerning the government. If the Queen's issue is of male sex, the Riksdag shall appoint a regent as provided in Article 93 of the Instrument of Government. If the Queen's issue is of female sex, that member of the family who according to Article 1 is next in the order of succession shall be King and accede to the government.
Art. 3.

Female members of the royal family, and their descendants, male or female, shall have no right to the crown and government of Sweden.
Art. 4. In accordance with the express provision of Article 2 of the Instrument of Government that the King shall always profess the pure evangelical faith, as adopted and explained in the unaltered Augsburg Confession and in the Resolution of the Uppsala Meeting of the year 1593, princes of the royal family shall be brought up in that same faith and within the realm. Any member of the royal family not professing this faith shall be excluded from all rights of succession.

5. A prince of the royal family may not marry unless the King, having obtained the opinion of the Council of State, has given his consent thereto. Should a prince marry without such consent, or if he, with or without consent, marries the daughter of a private Swedish citizen, he shall have forfeited the right of succession for himself, his children and their descendants.
Art. 6.

Art.

Princesses of the royal family may not marry without the King's knowledge and consent. The heir apparent may not embark upon a journey to any foreign country without the King's knowledge and consent Art. 8. A prince of the Swedish royal family may not become the ruling prince of a foreign state without the consent of the King and the Riksdag, be it by election, succession or marriage. Should he do so he and his descendants shall not be entitled to succeed to the Swedish throne.
Art. 9.

Art. 7.

Repealed. (Swedish Code of Statutes 1974:154) 81

In witness of the fact that all that has been thus prescribed is identical with our intent and decision we, representing all the Estates of the Realm of Sweden, have attached our names and seals, in Orebro on the twenty-sixth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ten. On behalf of the nobility
Claes Fleming

On behalf of the clergy
Jac. Ax. Lindblom

(L. S.) On behalf of the burghers
J. Wegelin

(L. S.) On behalf of the peasantry
Lars Olsson

(L. S.)

(L. S.)

Everything as herein provided We not only accept for Ourselves as the established fundamental law, but also direct and graciously command all who are united in loyalty, fealty and obedience to Us, Our successors and the realm, to acknowledge, observe, follow and obey this Act of Succession. In witness whereof We have with Our own hand signed and confirmed it, and duly affixed Our royal seal below, in Orebro, on the twenty-sixth day of September, in the year of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ one thousand eight hundred and ten.
CARL

(L. S.)

82

THE FREEDOM OF THE PRESS ACT

Chapter 1. ON THE FREEDOM OF THE PRESS Art. 1. Freedom of the press means the right of every Swedish national, without any hindrance raised beforehand by any authority or other public body, to publish any written matter, thereafter not to be prosecuted on account of the contents of such publication otherwise than before a legal court, and not to be punished therefore in any case other than such where the contents are in contravention of the express terms of law, enacted in order to preserve general order without suppressing general information. In accordance with the principles set forth in the preceding paragraph of this Article concerning freedom of the press for all, and in order to ensure free interchange of opinions and enlightenment of the public, every Swedish national shall, subject to the provisions set forth in the present Act for the protection of individual rights and public security, have the right to express his thoughts and opinions in print, to publish official documents and to make statements and communicate information on any subject whatsoever. Any person shall likewise have the right, unless otherwise provided in the present Act, to make statements and communicate information on any subject whatsoever for the purpose of publication in print, to the author or editor or editorial office, if any, of any publication, or to an enterprise dealing commercially with the forwarding of news to periodicals. Art. 2. No publication shall be subject to censorship before being printed, nor shall the printing thereof be prohibited. 83

Furthermore, no authority or other public body may, by reason of the contents of a publication, take any action not authorized by this Act to prevent the printing or publication thereof, or the circulation of the publication among the public.
Art. 3. Except in the manner and in the cases specified in this Act,

a person shall not on grounds of abuse of the freedom of the press, or complicity in such abuse, be prosecuted, convicted under penal law, or held liable for damages, nor shall the publication be confiscated or seized. Art. 4. Any person whose duty it is to pass judgment on abuses of the freedom of the press or otherwise to ensure compliance with this Act shall constantly bear in mind that freedom of the press is a foundation of a free society, always pay more attention to illegality in the subject-matter and thought than illegality in the form of expression, to the aim rather than to the manner of presentation, and, in doubtful cases, acquit rather than convict. In determining the sanctions which under the present Act are attendant upon abuses of the freedom of the press, particular attention shall, in the case of statements requiring correction, be given to whether such correction was brought to the notice of the public in an appropriate manner.
Art. 5. The present Act shall apply only to matter produced by

means of a printing press. The term "printed matter" includes maps, drawings or pictures, even if there is no accompanying text. Art. 6. Printed matter shall not be considered as such unless it is published. Printed matter shall be deemed to have been published when it has been delivered for sale or for circulation in some other manner; nevertheless, this definition shall not apply to such documents printed for a public authority as are to be kept secret.
Art. 7. The term "periodical" refers to newspapers, magazines or

other similar printed matter, as well as accompanying posters and supplements, provided that according to the publishing schedule the intention is to issue at least four separate numbers or sections of the publication under a fixed title at different periods during the year. Printed matter shall be deemed to be a periodical from the time of issue of a publishing license until such license is revoked. Art. 8. No privileges to publish written matter may be granted, provided, however, that such privileges for the support of public 84

institutions as have already been granted may be renewed by the Government, each time for not more than twenty years. Provisions regarding the copyright due an author of a literary or artistic work, or due a producer of a photographic picture, and provisions prohibiting the reproduction of literary or artistic works in a manner that infringes the cultural interests shall be laid down by law. Art. 9. Notwithstanding the provisions of the present Act, rules laid down by law shall govern 1. prohibitions against commercial advertisements insofar as such advertisements are used in the marketing of alcoholic beverages or tobacco products; 2. prohibitions against the publication, within the frame-work of any commercial activity for providing credit information, of any credit report which improperly infringes the personal integrity of an individual, or which contains an incorrect or misleading statement; liability to pay compensation on account of such publication; and correction of incorrect or misleading statements. Chapter 2. ON THE PUBLIC CHARACTER OF OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS Art. 1. To further free interchange of opinions and enlightenment of the public, every Swedish national shall have free access to official documents in the manner specified below. This right shall be subject only to such restrictions as are demanded either out of consideration for the security of the Realm and its relations with foreign powers, or with regard to the activities for inspection, control or other supervision carried out by public authorities, or for the prevention and prosecution of crime, or in order to protect the legitimate economic interests of the State, communities, and individuals, or out of consideration for the maintenance of privacy, security of the person, decency and morality Those cases in which official documents, in accordance with the aforementioned principles, are to be kept secret, shall be clearly defined in a specific act of law. Art. 2, The term "official document" shall refer to any document kept by a State or municipal authority, whether it has been received or drawn up by such authority. The provisions of the present Chapter relating to documents shall likewise apply to maps, drawings, and pictures. Any such provision regarding a document shall apply also to any recording for electro85

nic data processing or other recording which can be read or listened to only by means of technical aids. Any recording such as is referred to in the second paragraph of this Article shall be considered to be kept by an authority even in cases where it has been submitted to or drawn up by a person other than an authority, provided that the recording is available to an authority.
Art. 3. For the purposes of this Chapter "State authority" means

the ministries of State, the Office of the Defense Command, the Riksdag, the General Church Assembly, and their divisions, committees, delegations, commissioners, deputies and auditors, the courts and the administrative authorities and all other authorities and institutions, councils, commissions, and committees which constitute integral parts of the State administration. For the purposes of this Chapter "municipal authority" means all assemblies and representative bodies as well as authorities, boards, corporations, agencies, councils, commissions, auditors, committees, and delegations and their subordinate departments and institutions which constitute integral parts of local self-government.
Art. 4. A memorandum or other note prepared or drawn up by an

authority solely to present a case or matter or to prepare it for decision shall not be deemed to be an official document in the hands of such authority unless, after the case or matter has been finally settled by the authority, the note has been taken in charge for the purpose of being kept. Where a recording such as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 2 has been made solely to present a case or matter to an authority or to prepare it for decision by an authority, the recording shall not be deemed to be an official document in the hands of such authority unless, after the case or matter has been finally settled by the authority, the recording has been taken in charge for the purpose of being kept. Nor shall such recording, until the question of such taking in charge has been decided, be considered official within any other authority, if it is kept there merely for the purpose of being technically processed or being stored.
Art. 5. A document shall be deemed to have been received by an

authority when it has been handed over to the authority or the official who has the duty to receive the document or who is otherwise to deal with the case or matter to which the document is related. Diaries, journals, registers, and other similar lists shall be deemed to be drawn up when they have been made ready for entry or 86

posting. Minutes and other similar records shall be deemed to be drawn up when they have been revised and approved by the authority or when they have otherwise been made ready. Other documents relating to a particular case or matter shall be deemed to be prepared when they have been dispatched or, if they are not dispatched, when the case or matter has been finally settled by the authority. Art. 6. Competitive entries, tenders, or other similar documents which, according to an announcement, must be delivered in sealed envelopes shall not be deemed to have been received before the time fixed for their opening. A judgment or other decision of an authority which according to the relevant legislation must be pronounced or dispatched, and minutes and other similar records relating to such decisions, shall not be deemed to be prepared until the decision has been pronounced or dispatched. Minutes kept by committees of the Riksdag or of the General Church Assembly, by the Riksdag Auditors, or by Royal Commissions, or by a local authority on matters dealt with by the authority solely for purposes of consideration or preparation shall not be deemed to be drawn up until the matter to which the minutes refer has been finally settled by the authority and, in the case of minutes of the Riksdag Auditors, until a report on the matter has been published. Art. 7. The provisions of the present Chapter relating to official documents shall not apply to copies of such printed matter as is referred to in Article 7 of Chapter 4, nor to private letters, writings or recordings delivered to public archives or libraries or otherwise to an authority for the exclusive purpose of custody and care or for research and study purposes. The making available of such documents shall be governed by such rules as are specially enacted. Art. 8. Any official document which is not to be kept secret shall upon request, and free of charge, be made available, immediately or as soon as possible, to any person who desires to have access to the document for the purpose of reading or copying it at the place where it is kept. Any such recording as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 2 shall be made available in readable form or in such form that it can be listened to. A document which is to be kept secret only in part shall, notwithstanding this fact, be made available at the place where it is kept if this can be done in such a manner that the matter contained in the secret part is not revealed. If this cannot be done the person who wishes to examine the document shall, free of charge, obtain a copy 87

thereof or, insofar as such recording as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 2 is concerned, a transcript of the recording, provided that the secret part shall then be excluded from the copy or transcript. There shall arise no obligation to make available a document at the place where it is kept if that would meet with considerable difficulties. Nor shall such obligation arise in respect of any such recording as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 2, if the

contents of the recording are kept in readable form within another authority and can be made available there without the person wishing to examine the recording being caused any considerable inconvenience. Any person who wishes to examine an official document which is not to be kept secret or is to be kept secret only in part shall furthermore be entitled, at a stipulated fee, to obtain a copy of the document subject to the exclusion of such part thereof as is to be kept secret. An authority shall be under no obligation to make a recording for electronic data processing available in any manner other than making a transcript of the recording available. Nor shall an authority be under any obligation to produce copies of maps, drawings, or pictures for delivery if that would meet with difficulties and the document can be made available at the place where it is kept. Art. 9. Any request to obtain an official document shall be made with the authority where the document is kept. As regards a recording such as is referred to in the second paragraph of Article 2 the request shall be made with the authority which has the disposal of the recording. The request shall be examined and determined by the authority with which it has been made. Where in accordance with rules of procedure or a special commission the custody and care of the document has been entrusted to a particular official he shall himself decide whether the document shall be made available, provided, however, that in so doing he must comply with the instructions issued by the relevant authority and that in doubtful cases he shall submit the question to the authority for decision, if this can be done without undue inconvenience. If the official refuses to make the document available, the question shall, at the request of the applicant, be submitted to the authority. Provisions concerning the competence of a particular authority to examine and determine, in the place of such authority as is referred to in the first paragraph of this Article, questions regarding the making available of official documents are laid down in the second paragraph of Article 14. 88

Art. 10. If an authority has rejected a request that an official docu-

ment be made available, and if the applicant considers the decision contrary to law, he shall have the right to lodge an appeal against the decision in the manner hereinafter described; however, there shall be no right of appeal against any decision of the head of a ministry. Art. 11. Any such appeal as is referred to in Article 10 shall be lodged with the authority competent to entertain appeals against decisions or actions in that case or matter to which the relevant document relates, or, if there is no right of appeal in such case or matter, or if the document does not relate to a case or matter within the competence of the relevant authority, with the authority which in general is competent to entertain appeals against decisions or actions of the first-mentioned authority. The foregoing provision shall likewise apply with respect to the manner in which an appeal shall be lodged. Appeals shall be lodged with the Supreme Administrative Court in place of the Government. If no authority is competent under the foregoing provisions, an appeal shall be lodged, if it is against a decision of a local authority, with the county government, if it is against a decision of an authority subordinate to a county government, a diocese, an administrative board, or any other authority subordinate to the Government, with the superior authority, and in any other case with the Supreme Administrative Court. However, as regards decisions of an authority which is subordinate to the Riksdag or is under its supervision, the rules laid down by the Riksdag shall apply.
Art. 12. With respect to appeals against such decisions of an authority by which an appeal has been rejected the provisions of Article 11 shall apply mutatis mutandis; there shall be no right of appeal against any decisions by which an appeal has been upheld. Art. 13. If a person wishes to appeal against the decision of an

authority, he shall have the right to be informed of the procedure to be followed A case or matter regarding the making available of official documents shall always be dealt with promptly. Transcripts of decisions shall be supplied to the appellant free of charge. The bringing or hearing of an appeal action shall not be subject to any special conditions, such as payment of an appeal fee or official authorization. Art. 14. If an authority is in possession of an official document that is to be kept secret, and if the authority considers special 89

measures necessary to prevent the document from being unduly made available, it may place a note on such document to the effect that it is secret. The said note shall refer to the provision of law on the basis of which the document is to be kept secret and shall show the date on which the note was made and the authority which caused it to be made. With respect to special kinds of documents the secrecy of which is of eminent importance for the security of the Realm, the Government may order that a particular authority shall consider and decide questions of making such documents available. If such order has been issued, any document which is the subject thereof shall, in addition to the particulars specified in the preceding paragraph, carry an indication of the authority which is thus competent to consider and decide questions of making the document available. Any request made with another authority obtain a document carrying such indication shall, at the applicant's request, forthwith be referred to the competent authority. Except as provided in the present Article no document shall bear a note to the effect that it is secret.

Chapter 3. ON THE RIGHT TO ANONYMITY Art. 1. No author of any printed matter shall be under an obligation to have his name appear thereon. Nor shall any printer, publisher, or other person concerned with the printing or publishing of printed matter in any other manner reveal the identity of the author against the latter's wishes, unless an obligation to do so arises under law. Art. 2. The question of the authorship of a periodical may not be raised during any legal proceedings concerning the freedom of the press. Art. 3. With respect to non-periodical printed matter the question of authorship may be raised in legal proceedings concerning the freedom of the press only if the author is identified by the appearance in the publication of his name, or of a pseudonym that is generally known to designate him, or if he has acknowledged himself to be the author in a written declaration, or if he has made such acknowledgement voluntarily before the court seized with the proceedings. Art. 4. The provisions of Articles 1 and 2 on the anonymity of 90

authors shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any person who, not being an author, communicates information for publication in the manner specified in the third paragraph of Article 1 of Chapter 1, the provisions of Article 2 being thus applicable also to information intended for non-periodical printed matter. The provisions of Articles 1 and 3 on the anonymity of authors shall likewise apply to editors of non-periodical printed matter. Art. 5. If any person inserts, in printed matter, the name or pseudonym of the author contrary to the latter's wishes, or, in cases referred to in Article 4, that of the editor or informant against the latter's wishes, such person shall be punished by fines, or, if the offense is attended by particularly aggravating circumstances, by imprisonment for not more than one year. The same penalties shall apply if the name or pseudonym of a person who is not in fact the author, editor, or informant is inserted as author, editor, or informant. A fine of not less than 50 but not more than 500 crowns shall be imposed if the name of an author, editor, or informant is otherwise disclosed in an unauthorized manner. No offense referred to in this Article shall become the subject of any action by a public prosecutor unless the offended person reports such offense for prosecution.

Chapter 4. ON PRINTING AND PRINTING ESTABLISHMENTS Art. 1. Every Swedish natural or legal person shall have the right alone or assisted by others to produce printed matter by means of a printing press. Any establishment for producing such matter will be referred to in this Act as a printing establishment. Art. 2. A guardian or trustee who operates a printing establishment on behalf of a minor or other person shall be considered under this Act to have the same responsibility as a printer. Art. 3. If a person wishes to set up a printing establishment, he shall register the said establishment with the county government not later than two weeks before the first print is issued from it, and shall at the same time state his name or the firm-name under which he intends to operate the said establishment, the place at which he intends to set it up and the kind of printing that he intends to produce. What has now been said about the registration of a new printing establishment shall likewise apply in the case of removal of
9-740488

91

an establishment to a locality other than that previously registered. If the name of the printing establishment is changed, or if the proprietor intends to produce printed matter of a kind different from that previously registered, the county government shall be notified to that effect as soon as possible. When a registration or notice such as is referred to in the first or second paragraph of this Article has been made, it shall be incumbent upon the county government forthwith to inform the head of the Ministry of Justice and the local police authority thereof. The provisions of this Article on the obligation of a printer to make a registration shall not apply in the case of a printing establishment which performs picture or job printing solely for the use of the proprietor.
Art. 4.

All printed matter produced in the Realm and intended to be published here shall bear the name or firm-name of the printing establishment and the place and year of printing. The foregoing provision shall not apply, however, to printed matter classifiable as picture or job printing.
Art. 5.

If printed matter is produced for a particular printer entirely or in part at another establishment and the whole edition is delivered to him, the said printed matter may at the request of such printer bear the imprint of his printing establishment. If this is done, he shall be deemed to be the printer of such printed matter.
Art. 6.

One copy of all printed matter issued by a printing establishment shall be kept for one year by the printer and shall be made available by him for inspection at the request of the police authority.
Art. 7.

A copy (to be known as an inspection copy) of any printed matter produced in a printing establishment within the Realm shall at the time of publication of the matter be delivered by the printer for inspection, in Stockholm to the head of the Ministry of Justice, and in any other place to his appointed representative. Nevertheless, subject to the approval of the head of the said ministry, delivery of the matter may be deferred until a fixed period of time has elapsed after publication. Any inspection copy shall be complete and faultless and in all respects in the same condition as the copies intended for circulation. The provisions of the first paragraph of this Article shall not apply to picture or job printing, nor to communications from a public authority. The Government may grant exemptions from the said provisions also in other cases.
92

The obligation of a printer to deliver library copies of printed matter shall be governed by provisions of law. Art. 8. Failure to fulfil the obligation to register as provided in Article 3 shall be punished by fines of not less than 50 but not more than 500 crowns. Any printer who violates the provisions of Articles 4 or 6, or who neglects his obligation to deliver inspection copies under Article 7, shall be punished by fines; if the contents of the printed matter have been declared criminal, or if the circumstances are otherwise particularly aggravating, he may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than one year. Art. 9. For the purposes of this Act "picture or job printing" means picture postcards and picture albums, calling cards and formal announcements, address cards, labels, forms, advertising matter and printed wrappers and other commercial printing and similar printed matter, provided that by reason of the text or what is otherwise produced abuse of the freedom of the press can be considered to be excluded.

Chapter 5. ON THE PUBLICATION OF PERIODICALS Art. 1. The owner of any periodical shall be a Swedish national or a Swedish legal person. Where the property of an owner is under the administration of a guardian or a trustee, the responsibility which under the present Act accrues to the owner shall accrue to the guardian or trustee. Art. 2. Any periodical shall have an editor. The editor shall be a Swedish national and shall have his residence within the Realm. No person who is under age or is incapacitated or who is under guardianship or in bankruptcy may be an editor. Art. 3. The editor of a periodical shall be appointed by the owner. The duties of an editor shall include the power to supervise the publication of the periodical and to determine the contents thereof in such a manner that nothing may be printed therein contrary to the wishes of the editor. Any restriction on the powers which are thus vested in the editor shall be without effect. Art. 4. The owner shall be under an obligation to register the appointment of the editor with the head of the Ministry of Justice. The registration shall comprise the name and residence of the editor.
93

The

registration shall be accompanied by evidence that the editor meets the qualifications prescribed in Article 2 and by a statement by the editor that he has assumed the duties of an editor.
Art. 5.

A periodical shall not be published until a licence has been issued stating that no obstacle exists under this Act to the publication of the periodical. A publishing licence shall be issued by the head of the Ministry of Justice upon application by the owner. The application shall state the title of the periodical, the place of printing, and the publishing schedule. No publishing licence shall be issued until the registration of the editor provided in Article 4 has been made. If the title of the periodical resembles the title of a periodical, for which a publishing licence has been previously issued, to such an extent that confusion may easily occur, the application may be rejected.
Art. 6. The head of the Ministry of Justice shall be entitled to

revoke a publishing licence previously issued: 1. if the owner has given notice that publication of the periodical has ceased; 2. if the ownership of the periodical has been transferred to a person other than a Swedish national or Swedish legal person; 3. if there is no editor, or if the editor does not meet the qualifications prescribed in Article 2, and a qualified editor is not immediately appointed; 4. if six months have lapsed from the date on which the publishing licence was issued and the periodical has not appeared; 5. if during neither of the two last calendar years at least four issues or numbers of the periodical specified in the licence have appeared at different times; 6. if, within six months after the first issue was edited and appeared, it becomes evident that under the provisions of the last paragraph of Article 5 the licence should not have been issued; or 7. if the title of the periodical has been given a typographical appearance resembling the title of another periodical, for which a publishing license has been previously issued, to such an extent that confusion may easily occur and correction is not immediately brought about. In such matters as are referred to in sub-paragraphs 2 to 7 of the first paragraph of this Article the owner and the editor shall, if possible, be given an opportunity to express their views.
94

Art. 7. If, owing to the provisions of sub-paragraphs 2, 3, 5, or 7 of the first paragraph of Article 6, a publishing license has been revoked, the consent of the owner of the periodical in question shall nevertheless be required for the issuance, within two years from the date of the decision to revoke the licence, of a publishing license for another periodical with a title which resembles that of the firstmentioned periodical to such an extent that confusion might easily occur. Art. 8. If under the provisions of Article 2 an editor is no longer qualified, or if he otherwise ceases to function as editor, it shall be incumbent upon the owner forthwith to provide for the appointment of a new editor and to register the appointment with the head of the Ministry of Justice. The provisions of Article 4 shall apply to such registration which shall be accompanied, if possible, by evidence to the effect that the previous editor has been informed of the registration. Art. 9. The editor of a periodical may have one or more deputies who shall be appointed by the editor. The appointment of such deputy shall be registered with the head of the Ministry of Justice. Such registration shall be accompanied by evidence that the deputy meets the qualifications prescribed for editors in Article 2 and by a statement by the owner that he has approved the deputy. The provisions of the second paragraph of Article 2 shall likewise apply to deputies. If the employment of an editor is terminated, deputy appointments shall also come to an end. Art. 10. After the registration of a deputy, the editor may authorize such deputy, or, if there are two or more deputies, any of them to exercise in his place the powers vested in the editor according to Article 3. If it can be assumed that by reason of illness or any other temporary cause an editor will for at least one month continuously be unable to exercise his powers as editor, he shall as soon as possible delegate such powers to a deputy. If there is no deputy, or if the appointment of the person or persons named as deputy or deputies will come to an end, the editor shall forthwith provide for the appointment of a deputy and for the registration of the appointment as provided in Article 9. Art. 11. Every separate issue or number of a periodical shall bear the name of the editor. If the powers of the editor have been delegated to a deputy, every issue of the relevant periodical shall state that the deputy is acting
95

as editor, and if this is done, the name of the editor shall not be required in addition. Art. 12. If the owner of a periodical publishes the periodical without a publishing license or without being qualified for that purpose, or if an owner fails to provide in the manner specified in Article 8 for the appointment of a new editor or to register such appointment, or if an editor in the cases specified in the second paragraph of Article 10 fails to delegate his powers to a deputy, or if any person publishes a periodical the publication of which has been prohibited under this Act or which periodical obviously is a continuation of such periodical, or if any person causes his name to appear in a periodical a editor or deputy without being qualified, he shall be punished by fines; if the contents of the periodical have been declared criminal, or if the circumstances are otherwise particularly aggravating, the penalty may be imprisonment for not more than one year.

Art. 13. The penalties specified in Article 12 shall apply also to
any person who knowingly submits false information in any such application or registration as is referred to in this Chapter, or in a statement attached to such application or registration.

Art. 14. Any editor who violates the provisions of Article 11 shall
be punished by a fine of not less than 50 but not more than 500 crowns. This provision shall likewise apply to a deputy who acts as editor.

Chapter 6. ON THE CIRCULATION OF PRINTED MATTER

Art. 1. Any Swedish national or any Swedish legal person shall
have the right alone or with the assistance of others to sell, dispatch, or otherwise circulate printed matter. Art. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the present Act provisions laid down by law shall be applicable in cases where a person 1. exhibits a pornographic picture in or at a public place by way of displaying or any similar procedure in a manner which is liable to offend the public, or mails or otherwise delivers such picture to another person without the latter having ordered it beforehand;

2. circulates among children and young persons such printed matter as may, by reason of its contents, have a brutalizing effect, or may otherwise involve serious danger to the moral upbringing of young persons. The circulation of such maps of Sweden or parts thereof as contain information of importance to the defense of the Realm, and the circulation of drawings or pictures of a similar nature shall be governed by provisions to be laid down by law. Art. 3. If printed matter lacks the prescribed statement concerning the printer or place or year of printing, or if such statement to the knowledge of the distributor is incorrect, the distributor shall be punished by a fine of not less than 50 but not more than 500 crowns. For the circulation of printed matter which, to the knowledge of the distributor, has been seized or declared confiscated, or has been published in violation of a publishing ban issued under the present Act, or obviously is a continuation of printed matter the publication of which has thus been banned, the penalty shall be fines or, if the circumstances are particularly aggravating, imprisonment for not more than one year. Art. 4. The dispatch of printed matter by mail or through carriage by any common carrier shall not, owing to the contents of the matter, be subject to special restrictions or conditions. The foregoing provision shall not apply, however, to a dispatch constituting a violation of the provisions of Article 3. A common carrier who has received printed matter for carriage shall not be considered a distributor.

Chapter 7. ON OFFENSES AGAINST THE FREEDOM OF THE PRESS Art. I. For the purposes of the present Act "offense against the freedom of the press" means any offense consisting of an unlawful statement in printed matter, or an unlawful publication by means of printed matter. Art. 2. No announcement by advertisement or other similar communication shall be considered an offense against the freedom of the press if it is not readily apparent from the contents of the communication that liability for such offense may arise. If the communication, having regard also to circumstances which are not readily apparent from the contents of the communication, is punishable, 97

the relevant provisions of law shall apply. The foregoing provisions shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any communication in cipher or in any other technique which is kept secret to the public. Art. 3. If a communication which has been delivered for publication in printing pursuant to the third paragraph of Article 1 of Chapter 1 has not thus been printed, and if it constitutes defamation of a private subject, the question of liability under penal law for such defamation shall be governed by the relevant provisions of law. If a person by delivering a communication to another person commits sedition, high treason, treason, treachery, espionage, grave espionage, or attempts to commit such crime, or is guilty of preparation for or instigation to such crime, or if a person who, while in public office or in the exercise of national service governed by law, has acquired knowledge of matters concerning which he is required by law to observe silence, discloses what he has thus learnt, his act may, although the communication was made for publication in printing, be prosecuted, and liability in respect thereof may be imposed under the relevant provisions of penal law. The criminal liability for making available official documents which are to be kept secret shall be governed by the provisions of the specific act of law referred to in Article 1 of Chapter 2.
Art. 4. With due regard to the purpose of a universal freedom of the press as set forth in Chapter 1 any such representation which is punishable under law shall be considered an unlawful statement in printed matter if it involves 1. high treason, committed with the intention that the Realm or part thereof, by violence or other unlawful means, or with foreign assistance, shall be made subject to a foreign power or be made dependent upon such power, or that part of the Realm shall by such means be detached, or that actions or decisions of the Head of State, the Government, the Riksdag, or the supreme judicial or administrative court shall be brought about or obstructed coercively and with foreign assistance, insofar as the act involves danger that the intention shall be carried out; any attempt, preparation, or instigation aiming at such high treason; 2. instigation of war, insofar as danger that the Realm shall be involved in war or other hostilities is provoked with foreign assistance; 3. sedition, committed with the intention that the constitution shall be overthrown by armed force or other violent

98

means, or that actions or decisions of the Head of State, the Government, the Riksdag, or the supreme judicial or administrative court shall be brought about or obstructed by such means, insofar as the act involves danger that the intention shall be carried out; any attempt, preparation, or instigation aiming at such sedition; 4. treason or treachery, insofar as thereby, when the Realm is at war or provisions of law relating to such crime are otherwise in force, a person induces members of the armed forces of the Realm or of a state allied with the Realm, or others who are engaged in activities for the defense of the Realm, to commit mutiny or treachery, or to become discouraged; or by false statements spreads such despair among the people or commits any other treasonable act which is to the detriment to the national defence or the national supplies, or, if the Realm is wholly or partially occupied by a foreign power without military resistance being exercised, to the resistance activities; any attempt, preparation, or instigation aiming at such treason or treachery; 5. any such act as is specified under 4 when committed by negligence; 6. libel against the King or any other member of the Royal family, or against a person who in the capacity of a regent fulfills the duties of the Head of State; 7. any defamatory act against a person who holds or has held an official position or any other position exercised under official responsibility, or against any person whd by order of the Government enjoys protection as an official, if the defamation is committed on account of his official functions; 8. (This sub-paragraph has been repealed, act 1971:29.) 9. incitement to criminal acts, to neglect of civic duties, or to disobedience to a public authority; 10. dissemination of false rumour or other false statements which are liable to endanger the security of the Realm, or any act by which a person communicates, or causes the communication of, such rumour or statement to a foreign power; 11. dissemination of false rumours or other false statements which are liable to endanger the national supplies or public order and security, or to undermine the respect for a public authority or any other body vested with the
10-740488

99

power to make decisions in public matters; 12. threats against, or contempt for a group of people of a particular race, skin colour, or national or etnic origin, or of a particular religious confession; or 13. (This sub-paragraph has been repealed, act 1971:29.) 14. (This sub-paragraph has been repealed, act 1971:29.) 15. libel against a private subject. For the purposes of this Article "libel" means slander and defamation. "Slander" means that a person accuses another of being a criminal or of being reprehensible on account of his way of life, or otherwise communicates information which is liable to expose the other person to the contempt of others, but shall not include such act if, in view of the circumstances, it was justifiable to provide information in the relevant matter and the first-mentioned person provides evidence to the effect that the information was correct or that he had reasonable grounds for the information. Slander against a deceased person includes cases where the act was offensive to the survivors or could otherwise be considered to injure the serenity which should be due the deceased. "Defamation" means that a person insults another by an offensive invective or accusation or by any other insulting behaviour against him. Art. 5. An official document which is to be kept secret may not be published in print. Nor shall any information be published in print the disclosure of which would according to law constitute an offense against the security of the Realm, irrespective of whether the said information was obtained from public documents or in some other manner. Whenever the disclosure of any matter has been prohibited by the order of a court, or by the order of the chief investigator in a criminal case, or owing to reservations made by an authority in making available documents specified in the first paragraph, the publication of such matter shall also be prohibited. Art. 6. The provisions of law concerning punishment for offenses specified in Articles 4 and 5 shall also apply where the offense constitutes an offense against the freedom of the press. Provisions concerning claims for damages on account of offenses against the freedom of the press are set forth in Chapter 11. If the accused has been convicted of an offense specified in sub-paragraphs 7 or 15 of Article 4 and if the printed matter is a periodical, an order that the judgment be inserted in the periodical may be issued on demand. 100

Art. 7. Printed matter that contains an offense against the freedom of the press may be confiscated. When confiscation of printed matter shall take place all copies intended for circulation shall be destroyed, and such action shall be taken with respect to moulds, lithographic stones, stereotypes, plates and other similar materials adapted exclusively for the printing of that matter as will make abuse of them impossible. Art. 8. In the case of such unlawful statement in a periodical as is referred to in sub-paragraphs 1 to 4 of Article 4, or in the case of the publication in a periodical of any matter the publication of which is unlawful under the provisions of the second paragraph of Article 5 and which constitutes espionage, the court may, in addition to ordering confiscation, prohibit the publication of the periodical for a certain period which shall not exceed six months from the date on which the judgment in the action concerning the freedom of the press becomes final. Such prohibition may, however, be issued only when the Realm is at war. The provisions of law generally applicable to forfeiture of property owing to a crime shall apply to the confiscation of a periodical circulated in violation of a publishing ban or manifestly constituting a continuation of a periodical specified in such ban.

Chapter 8. PROVISIONS CONCERNING LIABILITY UNDER PENAL LAW On Liability for Periodicals Art. 1. Liability under penal law for offenses against the freedom of the press committed in a periodical shall lie with the person who was registered with the head of the Ministry of Justice as the editor when the periodical was published. If a deputy was so registered and acted as editor, the deputy shall be liable. Art. 2. If a publishing license did not exist when the periodical was published, or if the editor liable under the provisions of the first paragraph of Article 1 was no longer qualified according to Article 2 of Chapter 5, or if he had otherwise ceased to function as editor, the owner shall be liable. The owner shall likewise be liable where the editor was appointed merely for the sake of appearances or was otherwise at the time of 101

publication of the periodical obviously not in due possession of the powers accruing to him according to Article 3 of Chapter 5. If a deputy acting as editor was no longer qualified at the time of publication of the periodical, or if his commission had otherwise expired, or if the circumstances specified in the second paragraph of this Article were applicable to the deputy, the editor shall be liable. Art. 3. If the identity of the owner, at the time of publication of the periodical, cannot be established, the printer shall be liable in place of the owner. Art. 4. If a person circulates a periodical which does not bear a statement concerning the printing establishment, or if such statement is known to the distributor to be incorrect, and if the identity of the printing establishment cannot be ascertained, then the distributor shall be liable in place of the printer.

On Liability for Non-Periodical Printed Matter Art. 5. When an offense is committed against the freedom of the press by means of printed matter other than a periodical the author shall be liable, provided that he has been named as the author of the publication in the manner prescribed in Article 3 of Chapter 3. The author shall not, however, be liable if the matter was published without his consent, or if his name or pseudonym appeared thereon contrary to his wishes. Art. 6. If under Article 5 an author is not liable for matter which includes or is intended to include contributions by several authors, and if a special editor of the printed matter has been named in the manner prescribed in Article 3 of Chapter 3, such editor shall be liable. For printed matter other than such as is referred to in the preceding paragraph the editor shall be liable only if the author was dead at the time of publication. The editor shall not be liable if his name or pseudonym has appeared contrary to his wishes. The editor of printed matter other than a periodical is taken to be the person who, although not the author, delivers it to a printer or publisher for printing or publication. Art. 7. If under Articles 5 or 6 neither the author nor the editor is 102

liable, or if he was dead when the matter was published, the publisher shall be liable. The publisher of printed matter other than a periodical is taken to be the person who has taken charge of the printing and publication of the writing of another person. Art. 8. If there was no publisher, or if his identity cannot be ascertained, the printer shall be liable in place of the publisher. Art. 9. The provisions of Article 4 shall apply also with respect to the liability of a distributor of printed matter other than a periodical Provisions Applicable to All Printed Matter Art. 10. If the person who, according to Articles 2, 5, 6, or 7, would have been liable at the time of publication of the printed matter has no known residence within the Realm, and if his present where-abouts in the Realm cannot be ascertained in the course of the action, the liability shall pass to the person next liable in his place, provided that liability shall not pass to the editor of any non-periodical printed matter in cases other than those specified in the first paragraph of Article 6, or to a distributor. Liability shall also pass as aforesaid if there existed circumstances which according to law exclude from punishment the person who would have been liable under Articles 1, 2, 5, 6, or 7, and such circumstances were known, or should have been known, to the person next to him in the line of liability. Art. 11. Circumstances which under this Chapter would involve liability for a person other than the accused shall be taken into consideration only if the relevant evidence is produced prior to the main court proceedings. Art. 12. In determining the liability of a person who under this Chapter is liable for printed matter, the contents of the matter shall be deemed to have been inserted with the knowledge and consent of the said person.

Chapter 9. ON SUPERVISION AND PROSECUTION Art. 1. The head of the Ministry of Justice shall himself or through representatives appointed by him supervise the observance of this Act_ 103

Instructions for the representatives shall be issued by the head of the Ministry of Justice. Art. 2. If the head of the Ministry of Justice considers that public criminal proceedings should be instituted on account of an offense against the freedom of the press, he shall deliver the printed matter to the Attorney General with a notification to that effect. Even without being notified as aforesaid the Attorney General may bring action concerning such offenses against the freedom of the press as may be the subject of public prosecution. The Attorney General shall be the prosecutor in respect of other violations of the provisions of this Act.
Art. 3. Unless public criminal proceedings on account of an offense

against the freedom of the press have been instituted within six months from the date of publication and delivery of an inspection copy as provided in Article 7 of Chapter 4, such proceedings shall not be allowed. If, however, public criminal proceedings have been instituted within the said period, new proceedings may be instituted, notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, against another person who is liable for the offense. The statutory provisions regarding the time within which an offense must be prosecuted if punishment is to follow shall also apply to offenses against the freedom of the press.
Art. 4. The right of a private plaintiff to report offenses against the

freedom of the press or to institute criminal proceedings on account of such offenses shall be governed by law. Art. 5. If, according to the provisions of Chapter 8, no person may be charged as liable for the offense, or if no summons can be served in the Realm on the person liable, the prosecutor or plaintiff may, in lieu of instituting legal proceedings, petition for the confiscation of the printed matter.

Chapter 10. ON SPECIAL COERCIVE MEASURES
Art. 1. If there are reasons to believe that printed matter may be

subject to confiscation owing to an offense against the freedom of the press, the publication may be seized pending a decision on the question. Furthermore, pending decision of the court, a publishing ban may 104

be issued with respect to a periodical in the cases contemplated in Article 8 of Chapter 7. Art. 2. If an offense against the freedom of the press may be made the subject of public prosecution, a seizure order and a publishing ban under Article 1 may be issued by the head of the Ministry of Justice before criminal proceedings have been instituted or petition has been made to the court for the confiscation of the printed matter. The head of the Ministry of Justice may also commission one of his representatives to issue a seizure order. Art. 3. Such order as is referred to in Article 2 shall not be issued later than one week after publication or delivery of an inspection copy as provided in Article 7 of Chapter 4. When a representative of the head of the Ministry of Justice has ordered a seizure, a notice to that effect shall be forwarded without delay together with a copy of the publication to the head of the Ministry of Justice, who shall forthwith determine whether the seizure shall be upheld. If, under the provisions set forth below, printed matter has been impounded, the head of the Ministry of Justice shall determine, as soon as possible, whether it shall be seized, and a decision to this effect may be given notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph.
Art. 4.

When the head of the Ministry of Justice has ordered a seizure or confirmed a seizure order issued by any of his representatives the printed matter and information concerning the seizure shall be submitted forthwith to the Attorney General. If criminal proceedings have not been initiated, nor any petition for confiscation has been made, within two weeks from the date on which the Attorney General received the information, the seizure and any publishing ban attending it shall become void.
Art. 5.

After the institution of criminal proceedings on account of an offense against the freedom of the press or after a petition for confiscation has been made to the court, the court may order a seizure and issue a publishing ban or repeal an order of seizure or ban previously issued. When a final decision is given following an action, the court shall determine whether an order issued shall continue to be in force. If a case is dismissed because the court is not competent, or if the court otherwise dismisses a case without deciding whether the printed matter is of a criminal nature, and if there is reason to believe that confiscation will be demanded in another action, the 105

court may confirm the order for a limited period to be determined by the court. If no action has been brought within that period, the order shall become void. Art. 6. A seizure order shall contain a statement as to the passage or passages in the publication that have occasioned the seizure and shall apply only to the volume, part, issue or number wherein such passages occur. Art. 7. A seizure order shall be enforced forthwith by the police authority, provided that a seizure order issued by a local representative of the head of the Ministry of Justice may be enforced only in the relevant place until it has been confirmed by the head of the Ministry of Justice. The circulation of printed matter which has been seized is subject to the prohibition provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 6. Art. 8. Seizure of printed matter shall be carried out only with regard to those copies which were intended for circulation. An official notice of the seizure shall be furnished free of charge to the person on whose premises the seizure takes place and to the printing establishment at which the publication was printed. Such notice shall contain information concerning the passage or passages in the publication which caused the seizure. Art. 9. Whenever a seizure order has been repealed or has become void, the seizure shall forthwith cease to have effect. Art. 10. (This Article has been repealed, act 1971:29.) Art. 11. If in a detachment of the armed forces, printed matter is discovered which manifestly constitutes such incitement, punishable under the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 7, as may induce members of the armed forces to neglect their duties, such matter, by decision of the official who according to law has the right to impose punishment with regard to personnel in the detachment, may be impounded pending a seizure order. If there is danger in delay, action as aforesaid may also be taken by another official of the rank of officer without such decision. However, such action shall be reported without delay to the first-mentioned official, who shall forthwith consider whether the publication shall remain impounded. Art. 12. When under the provisions of Article 11 a decision has been made on the impounding of printed matter, a notice to that
106

effect together with a copy of the publication shall, as soon as possible, be submitted to the head of the Ministry of Justice. Art. 13. The provisions of law generally applicable to the seizure of objects that may be declared forfeited shall apply to the seizure of any periodical circulated in violation of a publishing ban or manifestly constituting a continuation of a periodical specified in such ban.

Chapter 11. ON CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES Art. 1. A claim for damages based on abuse of the freedom of the press may be entered solely on the ground that the printed matter specified in the claim contains an offense against the freedom of the press. Unless otherwise provided below, such claim may be made only against the person who is liable for the offense under penal law, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8. If by reason of such zircumstances as are referred to in Article 10 of Chapter 8, liability has devolved on such person, the claim may also be made against the person liable immediately before him, provided that, and to such an extent as, the said claim may otherwise be made according to law. The provisions of Article 12 of Chapter 8 concerning liability shall also apply to claims for damages. Art. 2. A claim for damages that may be made against the editor of a periodical or his deputy may also be made against the owner. As regards other printed matter, a claim that may be made against the author or editor may also be made against the publisher. Art. 3. If any person, as legal representative of a legal person, or as guardian or trustee, is liable for damages on account of an offense against the freedom of the press, a claim for damages may be made also against the legal person, or against the person for whom the guardian or trustee was appointed, provided that, and to such extent as, the said claim may otherwise be made according to law.
Art. 4. If under this Chapter a person is liable for damages together with another person such persons shall be jointly and severally liable. Determination of the apportionment of liability between the two parties shall be governed by the relevant statutory provisions.

Art. 5. A claim for damages on account of an offense against the 107

freedom of the press may be made even though no action under penal law on account of the offense may be brought.

Chapter 12. ON LEGAL PROCEEDINGS IN ACTIONS IN FREEDOM OF THE PRESS CASES Art. 1. Actions concerning the freedom of the press shall be brought before that district court within the jurisdiction of which the county government has its seat. If there is any reason prompting the designation of another district court within the county to hear actions concerning the freedom of the press, the Government may issue orders to that effect. Actions concerning the freedom of the press are actions concerning criminal or civil liability on account of offenses against the freedom of the press, as well as such petition cases as are referred to in Article 5 of Chapter 9. Art. 2. In case of an action under penal law and concerning the freedom of the press the question whether the printed matter is criminal shall be tried by a jury of nine members, unless both parties declare themselves willing to refer the case to the court for decision without a jury. Whenever the criminal nature of printed matter is tried by a jury, the matter shall be considered criminal if at least six members of the jury concur in that opinion. If the jury finds that the matter is not criminal, the defendant shall be acquitted. If the jury considers it criminal, the court shall also consider whether the matter is criminal. If the opinion of the court differs from that of the jury, the court shall have the right to acquit the defendant or to apply a penal provision less severe than that applied by the jury.
Art. 3. Jurors shall be selected in each county and shall be divided

into two groups with sixteen jurors in the first group and eight in the second group. The jurors in the second group must be or have been lay members of an ordinary court of first instance. Art. 4. Jurors shall be selected for a term of four calendar years. In each county the jurors shall be elected by the county council or, where in the county there is a primary municipality which does not belong to any county council, jointly by the county council and the council of the first-mentioned municipality. In the county of Gotland jurors shall be elected by the council of the Gotland 108

municipality. If, as aforesaid, jurors are to be elected by more than one electoral body, the number of jurors in each group shall be divided by the county government between the electoral bodies in proportion to the population. When jurors are to be elected it shall be incumbent upon the district court to give notice to this effect to the authority responsible for arranging the election. Art. 5. Jurors shall be selected from among Swedish nationals resident in the county who are legally competent. They shall be known for soundness of judgment, independence and fair-mindedness. Different social groups and currents of opinion, and various parts of the county, shall be represented among the jurors.
Art. 6. Any juror who has attained the age of sixty years shall be entitled to withdraw from his duties. If in any other case a juror wishes to retire, the district court shall examine whether valid reasons exist which prevent him from fulfilling his duties. If a juror ceases to be eligible, his commission shall no longer be valid.

Art. 7. If a juror retires or ceases to be eligible, the electoral body shall select another person from the group to which the retired member belonged to replace him for the remainder of the election period. Such a juror may be elected by the executive committee of the county council on behalf of the county council, but such election shall be valid only until the next session of the county council.
Art. 8. Complaints concerning the election of jurors shall be lodged with the district court. Even though no complaint has been lodged, the court shall examine the qualifications of the persons elected. The provisions of law concerning appeals against the decisions of a district court in legal proceedings shall also apply to an appeal against the decision of a district court on a question specified in the preceding paragraph. There shall be no appeal against the decision of a court of appeal. Even if a complaint is lodged, the election shall be valid unless the court decides otherwise. Art. 9. Persons elected as jurors shall be entered on a jurors' list in

which each group shall be included separately. Ad. 10. When legal proceedings in which a jury is to participate have been initiated, the court shall present the jurors' list and shall raise the question whether there are grounds for disqualification of 109

any person included on the list. The provisions of law relating to disqualification of judges shall apply. The jury shall then be composed of undisqualified jurors in the following manner: each party shall have the right to exclude three jurors in the first group and one in the second, and the court shall then by lot select substitutes from among those who remain until six jurors remain in the first group and three in the second.
Art. 11.

If there are several parties on one side and only one of them wishes to make use of his right of exclusion, the exclusion made by him shall be deemed also to be made by the others. If co-parties wish to exclude different jurors, and if they are unable to reach an agreement, the court shall make the exclusion by lot.
Art. 12.

No person shall evade the duties of a juror without having a legal excuse. If because of disqualifications or legal excuses the number of members required in a group cannot be obtained, the court shall name for each juror required three persons eligible to be jurors in that group. Each party shall have the right to exclude one of the persons so named. No person shall be named as juror who was previously excluded in the same proceedings.
Art. 13.

If more than one case in which a jury is to take part are brought before the court at the same time, the court may, with the consent of the parties, provide that the same jury shall serve in all the cases. If a jury is to be selected jointly for two or more cases, the provisions of Article 11 regarding the exclusion of jurors in a case in which there is more than one party on one side shall apply
mutatis muntandis.
Art. 14.

If in legal proceedings under penal law also an action under civil liability law is brought against a person other than the defendant, the steps to be taken by a defendant as specified in the first paragraph of Article 2, the second paragraph of Article 10, and the second paragraph of Article 12 shall be incumbent upon the accused. If an action not involving prosecution but concerning the confiscation of printed matter or being an action under civil liability law is brought, the provisions of Article 2 and of Articles 10 to 13 shall apply to the proceedings; if, however, the criminal nature of the matter has been previously considered in a case concerning liability under penal law for an offense against the freedom of the press, the criminal nature of such matter shall not be reconsidered.
110

In a petition case the exclusion of jurors which is otherwise the prerogative of the parties, shall be made by the court by lot. Art. 15. Further provisions regarding the legal proceedings in actions concerning the freedom of the press shall be set forth by law. If within one county there are several district courts before which an action concerning the freedom of the press may be brought, the duties specified in Articles 4, 6, 8, and 9 shall be fulfilled by that district court which the Government shall designate.

Chapter 13. ON MATTERS PRINTED IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES Art. 1. Matter printed outside the Realm shall be deemed to have been published here when in the manner prescribed in Article 6 of Chapter 1 it has been delivered for circulation within the Realm. Art. 2. If a periodical which is printed outside the Realm is intended principally for circulation within the Realm, the relevant provisions of Chapter 5 shall apply, but those provisions relating to the qualifications of owners shall not be applicable. Publication in the Realm of any other periodical which is printea outside the Realm shall not require a publishing license, provided, however, that if such a license exists, the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall apply to the publication. Art. 3. With regard to matter printed outside the Realm, the provisions of this Act concerning the responsibility of printers shall refer to the person who caused the matter to be delivered for circulation in the Realm, or, if the identity of such person can not be ascertained, or, if at the time it was published here he was not resident in the Realm, to the person who shall be considered the distributor according to the provisions of Chapter 6. Art. 4. Inspection copies of a periodical for which a publishing license is required or has nevertheless been issued shall be delivered as provided in Article 7 of Chapter 4. This provision shall also apply to non-periodical printed matter, if such matter is entirely or partially in the Swedish language, and provided that it had not been imported solely in a few single copies. The obligation specified in the preceding paragraph shall be incumbent, in the case of periodicals upon the editor, and in the 111

case of other printed matter upon the publisher or, if there is no publisher, upon the person who caused it to be delivered for circulation in the Realm. If the obligation is not complied with, the provisions of Article 8 of Chapter 4 shall be applicable. The obligation to deliver library copies of matter that has been printed outside the Realm shall be governed by provisions of law.
Art. 5. The provisions of the second paragraph of Article 1 of

Chapter 1 concerning the making of statements and the communication of information for the purpose of publication shall likewise apply to communications for publication in matter printed outside the Realm, provided that the communication does not refer to subject-matters the disclosure of which would constitute an offense against the security of the Realm, or concerning which the informant is otherwise obliged by law to observe silence. If the communication is punishable in this respect the relevant statutory provisions shall apply. If the communication constitutes defamation of a private individual but has not been printed, the question of liability under penal law for such defamation shall be governed by the relevant provisions of law. The provisions of Chapters 1 and 3, of Article 9 of Chapter 4, of Chapters 6 and 7, of Articles 1, 2, 5 to 7 and 10 to 12 of Chapter 8, and of Chapters 9 to 12 shall in relevant parts apply also to matter which is printed outside the Realm and published herein.

Chapter 14. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 1. The provisions of law generally applicable with respect to

the reopening of finally adjudicated cases shall apply also to judgments in cases concerning the freedom of the press, even if the criminal nature of the printed matter has been considered by a jury. If a case in which a jury has considered the criminal nature of printed matter is reopened owing to circumstances that may be presumed to have influenced the jury's considerations, the Supreme Court shall order such case again to be presented to a jury before the court which first pronounced judgment, provided that where reopening has been granted for the benefit of the accused, and the facts are obvious, the Supreme Court may change the judgment directly.
Art. 2. The provisions of Articles 10 to 14 of Chapter 12 shall

apply with respect to the appointment of a jury when following the decision of a higher court a case concerning the freedom of the 112

press, in which a jury has participated, is again to be presented to a jury before the court which first pronounced judgment. Art. 3. Actions concerning the freedom of the press and other actions concerning offenses against the provisions of this Act shall always be dealt with promptly. Art. 4. Fines imposed under this Act shall accrue to the State. Art. 5. In all matters not dealt with in this Act or in special legislation enacted by virtue of this Act, general provisions of laws or statutes shall apply. Except as otherwise provided in this Act or in other laws or statutes, foreign nationals shall be treated on a basis of equality with Swedish nationals. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS Legal proceedings which at the time of the entry into force of the Freedom of the Press Act in its new wording pursuant to the Amendment Act (1971:27) are still pending in a court of first instance competent under the repealed provisions but not competent under the new provisions shall nevertheless be brought to an end there. The Freedom of the Press Act shall apply in its new wording pursuant to the Amendment Act (1974:66) as from January 1, 1974. The repealed provisions shall continue to apply until the end of June 1974. The Freedom of the Press Act shall apply in its new wording pursuant to the Amendment Act (1974:155) as from the beginning of the calendar year following that during which the new Instrument of Government was finally adopted. As regards statutes which have been promulgated before the date on which the Freedom of the Press Act in its new wording shall continue to be applicable according to the first paragraph only such statutes as have been enacted by way of joint decisions by the King in Council and the Riksdag shall, for the purposes of application of the second paragraph of Article 3 of Chapter 7 and the first paragraph of Article 5 of Chapter 13, be considered to be laws.

1Only those transitional provisions are reproduced which refer to the enactment of amendments to the Act adopted in 1971 (Nr. 27) and in 1974 (Nrs 66 and 155). 113

