
IN THE NAME OF ALMIGHTY GOD! The Swiss Confederation, 
with a view to strengthen the Union of the Confederates, to maintain and promote the unity, power and honor of the Swiss nation, has adopted the following Federal Constitution: 
FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OF THE SWISS CONFEDERATION. 
CHAPTER FIRST. GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
ARTICLE I. 
The people of the twenty-two sovereign Cantons of Switzerland, united through the present Union, to wit: Zurich, Berne, Lucerne, Urihwys, Unterwalden (Upper and Lower), Glarus, Zug, Freiburg, Soleure, Basel (City and Country), Schaffhausen, Appenzell (both Rhodes), St. Gallen, Grisons, Aargau, Thurgau, Tessin, Vaud, Yalais, Neuchdiel, Geneva, constitute collectively the SWISS CONFEDERATION. 
ARTICLE II. 
The object of the Union is: to insure the independence of the country against foreign power; to maintain tranquility and order in the interior; to protect the liberty and rights of the Confederates, and to promote the common welfare. 
ARTICLE III. 
The Cantons are sovereign, so far as their sovereignty is not limited by the Federal Constitution, and accordingly they exercise all rights which are not delegated to the Federal power. 
ARTICLE IV.‚ All Swiss are equal in the eye of the law. In Switzerland 
there are no subjects, no privileges of place, of birth, of persons, or of families. 
ARTICLE V. 
The Union guarantees to the Cantons their territory, their sovereignty within the limits prescribed by Article III, their constitutions, the liberty and rights of the people, the constitutional rights of the citizens, as well as the rights and powers which the people have conferred upon the authorities. 
ARTICLE VI. 
It is obligatory upon the Cantons to secure the Federal guarantee of their constitutions. 
The Union assumes this guarantee, provided: 
a. That these constitutions contain nothing contrary to the provisions of the Federal constitution. 
b. That they secure the exercise of political rights according to republican forms, representative or democratic. 
c. That they have been accepted by the people, and that they can be revised whenever an absolute majority of the citizens demands it. 
ARTICLE VII.‚Special alliances and treaties of a political character between 
Cantons are forbidden.‚On the other hand, the Cantons have the right to conclude, 
among themselves, conventions for matters of legislation, justice or administration; these conventions they are however to submit to the Federal authority for examination, which authority, should these conventions contain anything contrary to the Union or to the rights of the other Cantons, is authorized to prevent their being carried into execution. Where there is no such incompatibility, the contracting Cantons are granted the right to claim the cooperation of the Federal authorities for their execution. 
7 ARTICLE VIII. 
The Union has the sole right to declare war, and to conclude peace, as well as to form alliances with foreign countries, and to make treaties with them, especially such as relate to customs 
and commerce. 
ARTICLE IX. 
To Cantons however, is reserved the right of concluding, with foreign countries, treaties on matters of public economy, neighbourly intercourse, and police; nevertheless these treaties must contain nothing contrary to the articles of the Union, nor to the rights of other Cantons. I 
ARTICLE I. 
Official communications between the Cantons and foreign governments or their representatives, are made through the medium of the Federal Council. 
Concerning such matters as are mentioned in the preceding Article IX, the Cantons can however, have direct communication with the subordinate authorities and functionaries of a foreign 
State.‚No contracts to furnish soldiers for service abroad [capitulations militaires] are permitted to be concluded. 
ARTICLE XII. 
The members of the Federal authorities, functionaries of the Confederation, and the Federal representatives or commissioners, are not permitted to receive from foreign governments pensions, salaries, titles, presents, or decorations. 
If they are already in possession of pensions, titles, or decorations, they must relinquish the enjoyment of their pensions, the bearing of their titles, and the wearing of their decorations, during the continuance of their functions. 
Subordinate functionaries and employees may however be permitted by the Federal Council to continue in receipt of their pensions. 
ARTICLE XIII. 
The Union has no right to maintain standing armies. 
ARTICLE XI. 
civil and military. 

8 
Without consent of the Federal authorities, no Canton, or in divided Cantons, no part thereof, is allowed to have more than three hundred men of standing troops exclusive of the police corps [gendarmerie]. 
ARTICLE XIV. 
The Cantons are bound, when contentions arise among themselves, to abstain from employing individual force or arming themselves and they shall submit in such cases to Federal decision. 
ARTICLE XV. 
Should a Canton be suddenly threatened with danger from abroad it is obligatory upon the government of said Canton to notify other Cantons to render assistance; at the same time giving the Federal authorities notice thereof, and submitting itself entirely to their further orders. The notified Cantons are in duty bound to render aid. The expenses are borne by the Confederation. 
ARTICLE XVI. 
If civil disturbances take place, or if one Canton is threatened with danger from another, the government of the threatened Canton is immediately to apprize the Federal Council thereof, in order t at the latter, within the limits of the authority vested in it (Article XC, Nos. 3, 10, and 11), may adopt the requisite measures, or convene the Federal Assembly. In pressing cases, the government in question is privileged, when notifying the Federal Council, also to inform other Cantons, that their assistance is required, and such as are called upon are in duty bound to render aid. 
I If it is out of the power of the Cantonal Government to apply for assistance, then may, and if the safety of Switzerland be placed in jeopardy, then shall, the properly constituted Federal authorities interpose of their own accord. 
In case of intervention, the Federal authorities will see to the observance of instructions contained in Article V. 
The expenses are borne by the Canton applying for assistance or causing the Federal intervention, unless, owing to peculiar circumstances, the Federal Assembly determine otherwise. 
9 ARTICLE XVII. 
In cases designated by Articles XV and XVI, every Canton is bound to allow free passage to the troops. These are forthwith to be placed under Federal command. 
ARTICLE XVIII. 
Every Swiss is subject to military duty. 
ARTICLE XIX. 
The Federal army, which is composed of the contingents of the Cantons, consists: 
a. Of the Elite, to which each Canton is to contribute three men from every hundred of its Swiss population. 
b. Of the Reserve, which consists of half the number of the Elite. 
In times of danger the Union has also disposition of the Second Reserve, which consists of all the remaining military forces 
of the Cantons (Landwehr).‚The scale of the contingents which determines according to 
the designated ratio the number of men to be furnished by each Canton, is to. be subjected every twenty years to a revision. 
ARTICLE XX. 
In order to secure in the Federal army the requisite uniformity and efficiency for service, the 'following principles are established: 
1. A Federal statute determines the general organization of the army. 
2. The Union assumes: 
a. the instruction of the Engineer corps, of the Artillery and Cavalry; it being however, obligatory upon the Cantons which are to furnish these branches of the service, to provide the requisite horses;‚b. the military tuition of instructors for the remaining branches 
of the service;‚c. the higher military instruction for every branch of the 
service, and for this purpose in particular erects military insti- tutes and orders the assembling of troops; 
d. the furnishing of part of the materials of war. 
The centralization of the military education can if needed, be farther developed by Federal legislation. 
3. The Union exercises surveillance over the military instruc- tion of the Infantry and Sharpshooters, and likewise over the purchase, construction, and maintenance of the materials of war which the Cantons are to furnish to the Federal army. 
4. The military regulations of the Cantons are not allowed 
to contain anything contrary to the Federal military organization, nor to the Federal obligations incumbent upon them, and must therefore with a view to ascertain this, be submitted to the Federal Council for examination. 
5. All corps of troops in Federal service, bear exclusively the Federal flag. 
ARTICLE XXI. 
The Union is empowered, when conducive to the interests of the Confederation or to a considerable part thereof, to construct or assist in the construction of public works at the expense of the Confederation. 
For this purpose it is also authorized to exercise upon granting full indemnity the right of expropriation. The more definite provisions relating to this subject are entrusted to Federal legislation. 
The Federal Asselmbly can prohibit the erection of public works which would be detrimental to the military interests of the Confederation. 
ARTICLE XXII. 
The Union is empowered to erect a University and a Polytechnic School. 
ARTICLE XXIH. 
The Customs and all relating thereto are affairs of the Union. 
ARTICLE XXIV. 
To the Union is delegated the right to abolish, wholly or in part, all land and water customs, road and bridge tolls, obligatory warehouse and other similar imposts, granted or recognized by 

11 
the Diet, be they levied by Cantons, Communes, Corporations or private individuals, upon justly indemnifying the recipients. Those customs and tolls which burden the transit, are at all events to be redeemed and that simultaneously throughout the whole extent of the Confederation. 
The Union has the right to levy on the frontiers of Switzerland, import, export, and transit duties. 
It is empowered, upon proper indemnification, to acquire possession, either as property in fee or under lease, of such buildings on the frontiers of Switzerland as at present are in use for customs purposes. 
ARTICLE XXV. 
When levying duties, the following principles are to be taken into consideration,: 
1. Import duties:‚a. Materials required by the home industry, are to be taxed 
as lightly as possible in the tariff schedule.‚b. Also such articles as constitute the necessaries of life.‚c. Articles of luxury are subject to the highest rates of tariff. 2. Transit, and in general also export duties, are to be made 
as moderate as possible.‚3. The custom laws will make adequate provisions for securing frontier intercourse and protecting market traffic.‚The Union is nevertheless, always empowered under extra- ordinary circumstances, to deviate from the preceding rules, and 
temporarily to adopt special measures. 
ARTICLE XXVI.‚The revenue of the import, export and transit customs are 
to be appropriated as follows:‚a. Every Canton receives four batz per head, according to 
the ratio of the entire population as taken in the census of 1838. 
b. Should a Canton thus not be sufficiently reimbursed for 
the abolished imposts mentioned in Article XXIV, it will then, according to the nett average receipts of the five years, 1842 to 1846 inclusive, be further entitled to such an amount as will be 
necessary to indemnify it for the said revenues.‚c. The surplus receipts go into the Federal Treasury.
ARTICLE XXVII. 
If customs, road and bridge tolls have been granted for the redemption of capital employed in building, or for a part thereof, the receipt or indemnification for such teases, as soon as the capital or part in question, including interest, is obtained. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. 
Such dispositions relating to transit duties as are already contained in railroad contracts remain unimpaired by these provisions. On the other hand, the Union assumes those rights embraced in contracts relating to transit duties, which heretofore 
had been reserved to the Cantons. 
ARTICLE XXIX. 
Free purchase and sale, free import, export, and transit from one Canton to another, are guaranteed to provisions, to cattle and merchandise, to products of the soil, and to mechanical productions of every description. Exceptions are: 
a. The regulations governing the sale and purchase of salt and gunpowder. 
b. The police ordinances of the Cantons in regard to the exercise of mercantile pursuits and trades, and the use of roads. 
c. Regulations against detrimental forestalling.‚d. Temporary sanitary police enactments during epidemics. The regulations contained in letters b and c must apply alike 
to the Cantonal citizens and the Swiss citizens of other Cantons. 
They are to be laid before the Federal Council for inspection, and are not allowed to take effect without previously having received its approval. 
e. Those duties which were granted or recognized by the Diet, and not revoked by the Union. (Articles XXIV and XXXI.) f. The excise tax on wine and other spirituous liquors, according to stipulations in Article XXXII. 
ARTICLE XXX. 
It is reserved for Federal legislation, so far as the interests of the Confederation are involved, to adopt the requisite measures in regard to the abolishing of existing privileges on transportation of individuals and goods of every description, on water or land, between Cantons or in their interior. 
I ARTICLE XXXI. 
The collection of duties, denoted in Article XXIX , letter e, is supervised by the Federal Council. These duties are not allowed to be increased; and the collection thereof, if limited to a certain time, cannot be continued without the concurrence of the Federal 
Assembly.‚The Cantons are on no account permitted to introduce new 
duties, road and bridge tolls. The Federal Assembly however, can grant for a limited period, the levying of duties and collection of tolls, in order thus to assist the construction of public works embraced in the intent of Article XXI, as being of general interest to commerce, and which without said grant, could not be constructed. 
ARTICLE XXXII. 
The Cantons are invested with the right to impose an excise tax on wine and other spirituous liquors, exclusive of the privileges reserved in Article XXIX, letter e, under the following restrictions however: 
a. When levying the same, the transit thereof shall in no way be burdened, and the traffic in general shall be checked as 
little as possible, and not subjected to any other duties.‚b. Should articles, which are imported into a Canton for consumption, be again exported, tie excise duty paid thereon is 
to be refunded, without any additional exactions.‚c. The excise tax upon native products of Switzerland is to 
be less than upon those coming from foreign countries.‚d. The excise tax on wine and other spirituous liquors of Swiss production is not allowed where it already exists, to be increased, and in Cantons where none at present is levied, is not 
permitted to be exacted.‚e. The laws and regulations of the Cantons concerning the 
levying of excise taxes, are to be submitted for approval to the Federal Council previous to their going into effect, in order that a disregard of the foregoing principles may be avoided. 

14 
ARTICLE XXXIII. 
The Mail arrangements throughout the whole extent of the Confederation are taken charge of by the Union upon the following conditions: 
1. The mail routes at present existing are not, on the whole to be lessened, unless with the assent of the Cantons interested therein. 
2. The rates of postage throughout the whole of Switzerland are to be uniformly affixed upon as low and equitable a scale as possible. 
3. To mail matter inviolable secrecy is guaranteed. 
4. For the relinquishment of the mail revenue, the Union indemnifies in accordance with the following conditions: 
a. The Cantons receive annually the average amount of the nett income which was yielded to them by the mail service on their Cantonal territory in the years 1844, 1845, and 1846. 
Should however, the nett revenue which is yielded to the Union by the mail service not be sufficient to cover these indemnities, then the above amount awarded to the Cantons will be diminished in proportion to the average receipts. 
b. If a Canton as yet has received no direct revenue from the mail system, or in consequence of a concluded letting to another Canton, has been in receipt of considerably less than the exercise of the mail service has evidently yielded on the territory of the Canton which had thus let the same, then circumstances of this kind are to receive due consideration when determining- the amount of indemnification. 
c. Where the exercise of the mail service has been ceded to private individuals, the Union assumes their indemnification. 
d. The Union is empowered and obligated to make use of such materials as appertain to the present mail service, so far as they are fit and requisite, and is to grant to the owners in return 
a fair compensation. I 
e. By indemnifying, the Federal administration is entitled, either by purchase or lease, to occupy such buildings as are at present in use for mail purposes. 

15 ARTICLE XXXIV. 
In the administration of the custom and postal systems, the employees are to be principally selected from among the inhabit- ants of the Cantons in which their services are made use of. 
ARTICLE XXXV. 
The Union exercises supervision over the roads and bridges in whose preservation the Confederation is interested. 
The sums mentioned in Articles XXVI and XXXIII as accruing to Cantons for duties and postal revenues, will be withheld by the Federal authorities, should these roads and bridges not be kept in good repair by the Cantons, corporations, or individuals having 
control of them. 
ARTICLE XXXVI. 
The Union exercises all prerogatives relative to coinage. Coinage by the Cantons is discontinued, and is carried on 
exclusively by the Union.‚It is reserved to Federal legislation to determine a standard 
of coinage, to rate the existing kinds of coin, and decide upon the more definite terms according to which the Cantons are obligated to have melted or recoined such coin as they may already have issued. 
ARTICLE XXXVII. 
The Union will introduce, according to the basis of the existing Federal concordat, uniform Weights and Measures for the whole Confederation. 
ARTICLE XXXVIII. 
The manufacture and sale of gunpowder within the extent of the Confederation is the exclusive privilege of the Union. 
ARTICLE XXXIX. 
The expenses of the Union are defrayed:‚a. out of the interests accruing on the Federal war funds;‚b. out of the revenue obtained from customs on the frontiers 
of Switzerland; 

16 
c. out of the revenue yielded by the mail service; 
d. out of the revenue arising from the manufacture of gunpowder; 
e. out of contributions from the Cantons, which however, can only be levied in accordance with acts passed by the Federal Assembly. 
Contributions of this kind are to be made by the Cantons according to the scale of their money contingents, which scale is to be subjected every twenty years to a revision. The population and condition of a Canton in regard to wealth and industry are to furnish the basis for such a revision. 
ARTICLE XL. 
There shall be at all times, on hand in the Federal Treasury in specie, at least double the amount of the contingent fund, in order to defray military expenses occasioned by the Federal summons of troops. 
ARTICLE XLI. 
The Union guarantees to all Swiss, the right of free settlement within the whole extent of the Confederation, according to the following more definite stipulations: 
1. No Swiss can be denied the right to settle in any one of the Cantons, provided he is in possession of the following 
vouchers:‚a. a certificate of nativity or its equivalent; 
b. a certificate of good moral conduct;‚c. a certificate that he enjoys the rights and honors of citizenship.‚2. The settler is not allowed to be subjected, on part of the 
Canton granting him permission to settle, to any bonds or other special burdens in lieu of his settlement. 
3. A Federal statute will determine the duration of grants to settle, and likewise, also the maximum of Chancery fees to be paid to the Canton in order to obtain the same. 
4. The settler enjoys all the rights and privileges of a citizen of the Canton in which he has settled, with exception of the right to vote on Municipal affairs, and of being joint owner of the 
, 

17 
Commonwealth and Corporation property. In particular, free exercise of industrial pursuits, and the acquisition and sale of real estate, are secured to him in accordance with the laws and ordinances of the Canton, which, in all these respects, shall consider the settler as being on an equality with its own citizens. 
5. Settlers of other Cantons cannot be subjected, on part of Municipalities, to greater Corporation taxes than settlers of their own Canton. 
6. The settler can be ordered out of the Canton in which he has settled: 
a. by the penal sentence of a court; 
b. by order of the Police authorities, on his having forfeited the rights and honors of citizenship, or having been guilty of an improper course of conduct, or through impoverishment having become a public burden, or having frequently been fined for transgressions of the Police ordinances. 
ARTICLE XLII. 
Every Cantonal citizen is likewise a citizen of Switzerland. As such he can exercise in Federal and Cantonal affairs the political rights of any Canton in which he has settled. He can however, only enjoy these privileges under the same restrictions as the citizens of the Canton, and as regards Cantonal affairs, only after a residence of a certain time, the length of which is designated by Cantonal legislation, and cannot exceed two years. 
No one is permitted to exercise political rights in more than one Canton. 
ARTICLE XLIII. 
No Canton can deprive a citizen of his rights of citizenship. 
No Canton is permitted to grant citizenship to foreigners unless they are released from their former State allegiance. 
ARTICLE XLIV. 
The free exercise of religious worship is guaranteed to the acknowledged Christian professions throughout the whole extent of Switzerland. 
2 

18 
To the Cantons as well as to the Union, is reserved the right to adopt measures necessary for maintaining public order and peace among the different denominations. 
ARTICLE XLV. 
The freedom of the Press is guaranteed.‚In regard to abuse of the same, Cantonal legislation deter- 
mines the requisite prescriptions, which however, require the assent of the Federal Council. 
The Union is empowered to designate penalties for abuse of the freedom of the press, when the same Is directed against the Confederation and its authorities. 
ARTICLE XLVI. 
Citizens have the right to form associations, provided there is nothing illegal or treasonable contained in their proceedings and object. Cantonal legislation determines the requisite regulations concerning the abuse of this privilege. 
ARTICLE XLVII. 
The right of petition is guaranteed. 
ARTICLE XLVIII.‚All Cantons are in duty bound to treat every citizen of 
Switzerland on an equality with their own citizens, in legislative, as well as judicial proceedings. 
ARTICLE XLIX. 
Judgments in civil cases definitively rendered in Cantons cart be enforced throughout Switzerland. 
ARTICLE L. 
The solvent Swiss debtor who possesses a permanent residence must, for personal claims, be summoned before the judge of the place where he resides, and it is therefore not allowed for this class of claims, to levy upon the property of such a person 
out of the Canton where he resides. 

19 ARTICLE LI. 
All rights to exact taxes from persons on account of emigrating with their property, or upon such effects as are sent abroad, as also the rights of redemption exercised by citizens of one Canton to the prejudice of citizens of another Canton are, within the interior 
of Switzerland, abolished. 
ARTICLE LII. 
The right to withdraw property without paying duty or tax for so doing is extended to all foreign States which reciprocate this privilege. 
ARTICLE LIII. 
No one is allowed to be debarred from the benefit of his Constitutional tribunal, and no privileged Courts of Justice are therefore permitted to be established. 
ARTICLE LIV. 
No sentence inflicting capital punishment for political offences, is permitted to be passed. 
ARTICLE LV. 
A Federal statute will determine stipulations between Cantons in regard to the extradition of any one accused. The extradition for political offences and misuse of the press cannot however, be made obligatory. 
ARTICLE LVI. 
To establish the citizenship of homeless persons and to adopt measures for preventing the recurrence of similar cases, are affairs of Federal legislation. 
ARTICLE LVII. 
The Union is empowered to expel from Swiss territory foreigners who imperil, at home or abroad, the security of the 
Confederation. 

20 
ARTICLE LVIII. 
The order of Jesuits, and societies affiliated thereto, are not permitted to be domiciled in any part of Switzerland. 
ARTICLE LIX. 
The Federal authorities are empowered to issue sanitary police regulations during epidemics threatening general danger. 
CHAPTER SECOND. 
FEDERAL AUTHORITIES. 
I.-FEDERAL ASSEMBLY. 
ARTICLE LX. 
The supreme power of the Union is vested in the Federal Assembly, which is composed of two divisions: 
A. of the National Council (House of Representatives or Delegates); 
B. of the States Council (Senate).‚A. NATIONAL COUNCIL. 
ARTICLE LXI. 
The National Council is composed of delegates from the Swiss people. One member is elected to every 20,000 inhabitants of the gross population. 
A fractional number of inhabitants exceeding 10,000 Is rated as 20,000. 
Every Canton and in divided Cantons, each part thereof is to elect at least one member. 
ARTICLE LXII. 
The elections for the National Council are direct. They take place in Federal election districts, which however, cannot embrace 
sections of different Cantons. 

21 
ARTICLE LXIII. 
Every Swiss is entitled to vote who is twenty years of age, and who in other respects, according to the laws of the Canton 
wherein he resides, is not excluded from active citizenship. 
ARTICLE LXIV. 
Every citizen of Switzerland belonging to the laity and possessing a vote, is eligible as a member of the National Council. Naturalized Swiss citizens must have possessed their acquired 
citizenship at least five years in order to be eligible. 
ARTICLE LXV. 
The National Council is elected for the term of three years, and at stated times an entire renewal of delegates takes place. 
ARTICLE LXVI. 
Members of the States Council, of the Federal Council, and the functionaries elected by the latter, cannot at the same time be members of the National Council. 
ARTICLE LXVII. 
The National Council elects from among its number, for every regular or extra session, a President and Vice President. 
The member who, during a regular session, occupies the position of President, is ineligible either as President or Vice President for the following regular session. The same member cannot be Vice President at two successive regular sessions. 
The President decides in case of ties. At elections he exercises the elective franchise the same as every other member. 
ARTICLE LXVIII. 
The members of the National Council are indemnified out of the Federal Treasury. 
B. STATES COUNCIL. ARTICLE LXIX. 
The States Council consists of forty-four Delegates from the 
Cantons. Each Canton elects two Delegates; in divided Cantons, each part, one. 

22 
ARTICLE LXX. 
Members of the National Council, and of the Federal Council, cannot at the same time be members of the States Council., 
ARTICLE LXII. 
The States Council elects from its midst, for every regular or extra session, a President and Vice President. 
Neither President or Vice President can be elected for a 
succeeding regular session from among the delegation of a Canton, one of whose members served as President during the regular session immediately preceding. 
Delegates of the same Canton cannot, during two successive regular sessions, occupy the position of Vice President. 
The President decides in case of ties. At elections he exercises the elective franchise the same as every other member. 
ARTICLE LXXII.‚The members of the States Council are indemnified by the 
Cantons. 
C. POWERS VESTED IN THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY. ARTICLE LXXIII. 
The National Council and the States Council have the control of all affairs which, according to the intent of the present Constitution, come within jurisdiction of the Union, and are not assigned 
-to other Federal authorities. 
ARTICLE LXXIV. 
The business department of the two Councils embraces in particular the following subjects : 
1. Laws and decrees to carry into effect the Federal Constitution, especially laws establishing the election districts, concerning the manner of voting, in regard to the organization and business routine of the Federal authorities, and the formation of Juries. 

23 
2. Salaries and compensation of members of the Federal authorities, and Federal Secretarial Department [Bundeskandlei], creating permanent civil offices and determining their emoluments. 
3. Election of the Federal Council, of the Federal Tribunal [Bundesgericht], of the Secretary [Kanzer], of the General, of the Chief of Staff, and of the Federal Representatives. 
4. The recognition of foreign States and Governments. 
5. Alliances and treaties with foreign countries, as also the approving of treaties concluded by Cantons with each other or with foreign powers. Such treaties of the Cantons however, only come before the Federal Assembly when the Federal Council or a Canton enters protest against them. 
6. Measures for security against foreign aggression, for maintaining the independence and neutrality of Switzerland, declaring 
war, and concluding treaties of peace. 
7. The guarantee of the Constitutions of the Cantons and of their territory; intervention consequent upon the guarantee; measures for domestic security, for the maintenance of tranquility and order; amnesty and pardon. 
8. Measures whose object is to secure a proper observance of the Federal Constitution, the guarantee of the Cantonal Constitutions, the fulfilment of Federal obligations, and the protection of rights guaranteed by the Union. 
9. Ordinances concerning the organization of the Federal military service, the instruction of troops, the allotments of the 
Cantons and disposal of the Federal army. 
10. Determining the Federal quota according to which troops and funds are to be furnished; legislative provisions regarding 
the administration and disposition of the Federal war funds; levying direct contributions upon Cantons; loans; estimates and 
accounts. 
11. Laws and ordinances concerning duties, postal service, coinage, weights and measures, manufacture and sale of gunpowder, 
arms and ammunition. 
12. Erection of public works and institutions, and the consequent appropriations. 

24‚13. Legislative enactments relative to settlers; relative to 
persons destitute of any citizenship, [Heimathlose]; foreign police, and sanitary regulations. 
14. Supreme supervision of the Federal administration and Courts of Justice. 
15. Complaints of Cantons or citizens against enactments of the Federal Council. 
16. Disputes among Cantons in relation to State rights.‚17. Contentions in regard to legal power, as particularly:‚a. whether a subject belongs under the jurisdiction of Federal 
or Cantonal sovereignty;‚b. whether a question should properly go before the Federal 
Council or the Federal Tribunal.‚18. Revision of the Federal Constitution. 
ARTICLE LXXV. 
The two Councils assemble once a year in regular session, on a day to be determined upon in their rules. 
They are convened for extra session by resolution of the Federal Council, or by request of one-fourth of the members of 
the National Council, or of five Cantons. 
ARTICLE LXXVI. 
In order that their transactions may be valid, the presence of the absolute majority of members of the Council in question is required. 
ARTICLE LXXVII. 
In the National and States Councils a majority of the votes cast, decides. 
ARTICLE LXXVIII. 
Federal laws and decrees require the concurrence of both Councils. 
ARTICLE LXXIX. 
The members of both Councils vote without instructions. 

25 
ARTICLE LXXX. 
Each Council deliberates separately. At elections, (Article LXXIV, No. 3), in the exercise of the pardoning power, and decisions in regard to jurisdiction, the two Councils however, unite under direction of the President of the National Council for joint deliberation, so that the absolute majority of the votes cast by the members of both Councils effects a decision. 
ARTICLE LXXXI. 
Each of the two Councils, and each member thereof, is privileged to make motions and offer resolutions. 
Cantons are at liberty to exercise the same privilege by correspondence. 
ARTICLE LXXXII. 
The sessions of the two Councils are generally public. II.-FEDERAL COUNCIL. 
ARTICLE LXXXIII. 
The highest executive and directing authority of the Confederation is the Federal Council, which is composed of seven members. 
ARTICLE LXXXIV. 
The members of the Federal Council are elected by the Federal Assembly for the term of three years from among any citizens of Switzerland who are eligible as members of the National Council. Only one member however, is allowed to be chosen from the same Canton. 
A total renewal of the Federal Council takes place after each total renewal of the National Council. 
Such vacancies as may occur during the intervening time are filled for the remaining term of office by the Federal Assembly next in session. 
ARTICLE LXXXV. 
Members of the Federal Council are not allowed to hold any other office, be it in the service of the Confederation or of 

business. 
I 
26 
a Canton, or be engaged in the pursuit of any other vocation or 
ARTICLE LXXXVI. 
The President of the Union is the presiding officer of the Federal Council, who, as well as the Vice President, is elected from among that body, for the term of one year, by the Federal Assembly. 
The retiring President is not eligible, either as President or Vice President, for the succeeding year. The same member cannot officiate for two successive years as Vice President. 
ARTICLE LXXXVII. 
The President and remaining members of the Federal Council draw an annual salary from the Federal Treasury. 
ARTICLE LXXXVIII. 
Not less than four members of the Federal Council constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
ARTICLE LXXXIX. 
The members of the Federal Council have an advisory voice At transactions of either branch of the Federal Assembly, and also have the right to offer resolutions relative to subjects under deliberation. 
ARTICLE XC. 
According to the intent of the present Constitution , the following duties in particular, are incumbent upon the Federal Council: 
1. It directs the affairs of the Confederation in accordance with the Federal statutes and decrees. 
2. It sees to the proper observance of the Constitution, Federal statutes and decrees, as also of the provisions contained in Federal concordats; it issues of its own accord, or on rendered complaints, the requisite orders for their enforcement. 
3. It exercises surveillance over the guarantee of the Cantonal Constitutions. 

27 
4. It suggests to the Federal Assembly laws and regulations, and gives its opinion upon the propositions which are communicated to it by the Councils of the Union or by Cantons. 
5. It executes the Federal laws and decrees, the sentences of the Federal Tribunal [Bundesgericht], as also the compromise 
or arbitration decrees concerning disputes between Cantons. 
6. It has those appointments to make, which are not delegated by the Constitution to the Federal Assembly and Federal Tribunal or by legislation are made to devolve upon some other subordinate 
authority. 
It makes the appointments for missions at home and abroad. 
7. It examines the treaties made by Cantons between themselves or with foreign powers, and approves of the same, provided they are admissible (Article LXXIV, No. 5). 
8. It protects the interests of the Confederation abroad, particularly its international relations, and attends to its foreign affairs 
in general.‚9. It provides for security against dangers threatened from 
abroad, and takes measures for asserting the independence and neutrality of Switzerland. 
10. It provides for the security of the Confederation in the interior, and for the preservation of quiet and order. 
11. In cases of emergency, the Federal Council is empowered, when the National and States Councils are not in session, to call out the requisite number of troops, and make disposition of the same, with the proviso of an immediate convening of the Federal Assembly, should the call for troops exceed two thousand in number, or continue longer than three weeks. 
12. It attends to the military affairs of the Confederation and all branches of administration, which are within the province of the Union. 
13. It examines the statutes and ordinances of the Cantons which require its approval; has surveillance over those branches of Cantonal administration which are placed by the Union under its supervision, such as military affairs, customs, roads, and bridges. 
14. It provides for the proper disposition of the finances of 

28 
the Union, for estimates, and the auditing of accounts concerning- the receipts and expenses of the Union, 
15. It supervises the management of affairs by all officials and employees of the Federal administration. 
16. It renders an account of its transactions to the Federal Assembly at each of the latter's regular sessions, as likewise a 
report in regard to the condition of affairs of the Confederation at home and abroad, and will recommend to its notice such measures as it deems would conduce to the advancement of the general 
welfare.‚It has also to render special reports, should the Federal Assembly, or a part thereof, make such request. 
ARTICLE XCI. 
The business of the Federal Council is divided into Departments among the respective members. This division however, has only in view to expedite the auditing and transaction of business- 
Each decision emanates from the Federal Council as authority. ARTICLE XCII. 
The Federal Council and its Departments are empowered for special business to call experts into requisition. 
Ill. THE FEDERAL SECRETARYSHIP, [Bundeskanzlei] ARTICLE XCIII. 
A Federal Secretarial Department [Bundeskanzlei], which is presided over by a Secretary [Kanzler], attends to the Secretarial business of the Federal Assembly, and to that of the Federal Council. 
The Secretary is elected by the Federal Assembly for the term of three years, simultaneously with the Federal Council. 
The Secretarial Department is under special supervision of the Federal Council. 
The details of organization of the Secretarial Department remain subject to Federal legislation. 

29 
IV. THE FEDERAL TRIBTNAL [Bundesgericht]. (Supreme Court.) 
ARTICLE XCIV. 
In order to facilitate the administration of Justice, so far as it lies within the jurisdiction of the Union, a Federal Tribunal 
of Justice is established.‚For trials of penal cases, Juries are empaneled. 
ARTICLE XCV. 
The Federal Tribunal consists of eleven members exclusive -of deputies, whose number is fixed by Federal legislation. 
ARTICLE XCVI. 
The members of the Federal Tribunal and their deputies are appointed by the Federal Assembly. Their term of office is three years. After the total renewal of the National Council, also an entire renewal of the Federal Tribunal takes place. 
Vacancies which may occur during the intervening time, are filled for the remaining term by the Federal Assembly at its next 
session. 
ARTICLE XCVII.‚Any citizen of Switzerland who is eligible to the National 
Council, is eligible to the Federal Tribunal.‚The members of the Federal Council and its appointees cannot 
simultaneously be members of the Federal Tribunal. 
ARTICLE XCVIII. 
The President (Chief Justice) and Vice-President of the Federal Tribunal are chosen from among the members thereof by the Federal Assembly, for the term of one year. 
ARTICLE XCIX. 
The members of the Federal Tribunal are remunerated per diem from the Federal Treasury. 
ARTICLE C. 
The Federal Tribunal appoints its own clerks.* 

30 
ARTIGLE CI. 
The Federal Tribunal decides on such civil cases: 1. as disputes which do not pertain to public law; 
a. between Cantons themselves; 
b. between the Union and a Canton;‚2. as disputes between the Union on the one part, and corporations or individuals on the other, when such corporations or individuals are plaintiffs, and the object in dispute is of considerable importance, which latter, Federal legislation determines; 
3. as contentions in regard to homeless persons [Heimathlose]. 
Cases comprised in No. 1, let. a and b, are presented to the Federal Tribunal through the Federal Council. Should this Council pronounce an application to be beyond the jurisdiction of the Federal Tribunal, then the Federal Assembly decides the same. 
ARTICLE CII. 
It is obligatory upon the Federal Tribunal, also to accept other cases for trial, when the same is appealed to by both parties and the object in dispute is of considerable importance, which latter is determined by Federal legislation. In such cases. however, the costs' fall exclusively upon the parties in question. 
ARTICLE CIII. 
The co-operation of the Federal Tribunal in trials of penal' cases will be determined by Federal legislation, which fixes the- details regarding the bills of indictment, and concerning the organization of the Courts of Assizes and Appeals [Kassations-gericht]. 
ARTICLE CIV. 
The Court of Assizes, having empaneled a jury which pronounces upon the facts presented, tries: 
a. cases where officials appointed by a Federal authority are turned over to it, to be adjudged for some penal offence; 
b. cases of high treason against the Confederation; of rebellion and acts of violence against the Federal authorities; 
c. cases of transgression against, and breaches of international law; ' 

31 
d. cases involving political offences and transgressions, which are causes or consequences of such disturbances as have necessitated an armed Federal intervention. 
The Federal Assembly is empowered, in regard to such offences and transgressions, to grant amnesty or pardon. 
ARTICLE CV. 
The Federal Tribunal, in addition, passes judgment upon the violation of rights guaranteed by the Federal Constitution, if com- plaints of this kind are referred to it by the Federal Assembly. 
ARTICLE CVI. 
It remains optional with Federal legislation to place, exclusive of those cases denoted in Articles CI, CIV, and CV, also others within the jurisdiction of the Federal Tribunal. 
ARTICLE CVII. 
Federal legislation will determine the details:‚a. in regard to the establishing of an Attorney Generalship; 
b. as io the crimes and transgressions which come under the jurisdiction of the Federal Tribunal, and as to what penal laws 
are to be applied.‚c. Concerning the proceedings, which are to be verbal and 
public.‚d. Regarding Court charges. 
V. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. ARTICLE OVIII. 
Everything relating to the seat of Government of the Federal authorities is subject to Federal legislation. 
ARTICLE CIX. 
The three prevailing languages of Switzerland, the German, French, and Italian, are the national languages of the Union. 
ARTICLE OX.‚The officials . of the Confederation are responsible for the 
faithful performance of their duties. A Federal statute will define this accountability more particularly. 

32 
CHAPTER THIRD. I REVISION OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION. 
ARTICLE CKI. 
The Federal Constitution can at any time be revised. 
ARTICLE CXII. 
The revision is accomplished according to the manner pre- scribed by Federal legislation. 
ARTICLE OXIII. 
If one of the two Councils composing the Federal Assembly determines upon a revision, and the other does not acquiesce, 
or if fifty thousand Swiss citizens legally entitled to vote, demand a revision of the Constitution, then, in either case, the question whether or not a revision shall take place, must be subjected to the vote of the Swiss People. 
Should, in either of the above cases, the majority of voting citizens of Switzerland express itself in the affirmative, then both Councils are to be elected anew, in order to take in hand the revision. 
ARTICLE CXIV. 
The revised Federal Constitution goes into effect when accepted by the majority of the voting Swiss citizens and by a 
majority of the Cantons. 

33 
TRANSITIONARY PROVISIONS. 
ARTICLE 1. 
In regard to the acceptance of the present Federal Constitution, the Cantons are to express themselves according to the prescribed regulations of the Cantonal Constitutions, or, where such Constitutions contain no provisions in regard thereto, in a manner to be determined by the supreme authority of the Canton in question. 
ARTICLE 2.‚The results of the balloting are to be transmitted to the seat 
of government, in order to be placed in the hands of the Diet, which decides whether the new Constitution is adopted. 
ARTICLE .3.‚If the Diet declares the Federal Constitution accepted, it 
immediately adopts the necessary measures for carrying it into effect. 
The duties of the Federal war council, and of the Council administrating the Federal war funds, devolve upon the Federal Council. 
ARTICLE 4.‚The provisions contained in the preamble and letter c of 
Article VI of the present Federal Constitution do not apply to Cantonal Constitutions already in force. 
Such articles of Cantonal Constitutions as conflict with the remaining provisions of the Federal Constitution are annulled from the day of the adoption of the latter. 
ARTICLE 5. 
The collection of Swiss frontier duties continues, until the new tariff of the future frontier duties is established. 
3 

34 
ARTICLE 6.‚The resolutions of the Diet and the concordats continue in 
force, so far as they do not conflict with the Federal Constitution. until they are canceled or altered. 
On the other hand, those concordats whose contents have been declared a subject of Federal legislation, become void from the time the latter goes into force. 
ARTICLE '7.‚As soon as the Federal Assembly and the Federal Council 
are organized, the Federal Compact of the 7th of August, 1815, ceases to exist. 
PREAMBLE AND RESOLUTION concerning the formal declaration of the adoption of the New 
Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation. 
THE FEDERAL DIET,‚After examination of the records [Verbalprozesse] and other 
acts forwarded to the seat of Government by all of the Cantons, concerning the balloting upon the Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation, which Constitution was the result of the deliberations of the Diet from May 15th, to June 27th, 1848 inclusive; - 
Whereas, in consequence of these official communications all the Cantons have expressed themselves concerning the acceptance or rejection of the aforesaid Federal Constitution, in the manner explicitly prescribed in the transitionary provisions annexed thereunto; 
Whereas, from a rigid examination of all the records concerning the balloting which took place in each one of the Cantons, it appears that the Federal Constitution of the Swiss Con- federation here alluded to, has been accepted by fifteen whole 

35 
Cantons and one Half-Canton, which jointly represent a population of 1,897,887 inhabitants, consequently the decided majority of the inhabitants of Switzerland and of the Cantons; 
In conformity with Article 2 of the transitionary provisions previously mentioned, according to which the Diet is empowered, after examination of the results of the ballotings to decide whether or not the New Federal Constitution is adopted, - 
RESOLVES: 
ARTICLE 1. The Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation, as it emanated from deliberations of the Diet, from the 15th of May until the 27th of June, 1848, inclusive, and submitted to the popular vote in each of the Cantons, according to the manner prescribed in Article 1 of the appended transitionary provisions, is hereby formally adopted and declared fundamental Law of the 
Swiss Confederation.‚ARTICLE 2. The present authenticated declaration, in connection with the adopted Federal Constitution in its original form, is to be deposited among the Federal archives, and moreover, a sufficient number of copies printed, which the Federal authority is immediately to forward to the various Cantonal Governments 
for general promulgation.‚ARTICLE 3. The Diet will immediately adopt, by virtue of 
its own powers, the requisite measures for carrying into effect the Federal Constitution. 
Done at Berne, the 12th of September, in the year of our Lord of thousand eight hundred and forty-eight. 
(L. S.) 
The Federal Diet; 
In whose name,‚The President of the Executive Council of the Canton of Berne, as Federal Seat of Government, 
President of the Diet: 
ALEX. FUNK. 
The Secretary of the Confederation: 
SCHIESS. 
 

