Title: The Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan: 6 November 1994 Date Adopted: 11/06/1994 Date Amended: 09/26/1999 Country: Tajikistan Copyright: Oceana Publications, Inc. Translation Type: Proprietary Translator: Patricie H. Ward

CONSTITUTION of the REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN Adopted on 6 November 1994 Table of Contents Preamble Chapter One: Fundamentals of the Constitutional Structure Chapter Two: Rights, Freedoms, Duties of Man and Citizen Chapter Three: The Supreme Assembly Chapter Four: The President Chapter Five: The Government Chapter Six: Local Government Chapter Seven: The Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast Chapter Eight: The Courts Chapter Nine: The Procurator’s Office Chapter Ten: Procedure for Constitutional Amendments

Preamble We, the people of Tajikistan,

As an inseparable part of the world community, Seeing ourselves responsible and duty bound to past, present and future generations, Wishing to ensure the sovereignty, development and perfection of our State, Recognizing the rights and freedoms of the person as sacred, Affirming the equality of rights and friendship of all nations and nationalities, Seeking to build a just society, Adopt and declare as valid this Constitution Chapter One Fundamentals of the Constitutional Structure Article 1. The Republic of Tajikistan is a sovereign, democratic, law-governed, secular and unitary State. Tajikistan is a social State, its policy aimed at providing decent living conditions and free development of man. The names “Republic of Tajikistan” and “Tajikistan” are of equal validity. Article 2. The State language of Tajikistan is Tajik. Russian is a language of communication between the nationalities. All nations and nationalities living on the territory of the Republic are entitled to freely use their mother tongue. Article 3. The State symbols of the Republic of Tajikistan are the flag, the emblem and the national anthem. Article 4. The capital of Tajikistan is the city of Dushanbe. Article 5.

The life, honor, dignity and other natural rights of the person are sacred. Recognition, observance and protection of the rights and freedoms of man and citizen are the obligation of the State. Article 6. In Tajikistan the people are the expression of sovereignty and the sole source of power of the State, and they exercise them directly or through their representatives. The citizens of Tajikistan, regardless of their nationalities, make up the people of Tajikistan. No social association, group of people or individual has the right to seize State power. The seizure of power is a specially serious crime. Only the President and the Supreme Assembly has the right to speak on behalf of all the people of Tajikistan. Article 7. The territory of Tajikistan is indivisible and inviolable. Tajikistan consists of [the] Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, towns, rayons, settlements, and villages. The State ensures the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Republic. Propaganda and actions aimed at disunity of the State are prohibited. The procedure for establishing and changing administrative and territorial units is regulated by a constitutional law. Article 8. In Tajikistan public life is to develop on the basis of political and ideological pluralism. No ideology, including religious ideology, can be established as the State ideology. Social associations are established and function within the framework of the Constitution and the laws. The State provides equal opportunities for their activities. Religious organizations are separate from the State and cannot interfere with State affairs.

The establishment and functioning of social associations that encourage racism, nationalism, social and religious enmity, and hatred, or advocate the forcible overthrow of the constitutional structure and the formation of armed groups is prohibited. Article 9. State power is exercised on the principle of the division of legislative, executive and judicial powers. Article 10. The Constitution of Tajikistan has supreme legal authority and its norms have direct application. Laws and other legal acts which run counter to the Constitution are of no juridical force. The State and all its bodies, officials, citizens and their associations are duty bound to observe and implement the Constitution and laws of the Republic. International legal acts recognized by Tajikistan are a constituent part of the legal system of the Republic. If laws of the Republic do not conform to the recognized international legal acts, the norms of the international acts apply. International laws and acts recognized by Tajikistan apply following official publication. Article 11. Tajikistan will implement a peaceful policy, respecting the sovereignty and independence of other States of the world and will determine foreign relations on the basis of international norms. Propaganda for war is prohibited. Proceeding from the supreme interests of the people, Tajikistan can join or withdraw from international associations and organizations and establish relations with foreign countries. The State will cooperate with compatriots living abroad. Article 12. The economy of Tajikistan is based on various forms of ownership. The State guarantees the freedom of economic entrepreneurship activity, equality of rights, and the protection of all forms of ownership including private ownership. Article 13.

The land, the earth, water, airspace, the world of animals and vegetation, and other natural resources are owned by the State, and the State guarantees their effective use in the interests of the people. Chapter Two Rights, Freedoms, Duties of Man and Citizen Article 14. The freedoms and rights of humans and citizens are protected by the Constitution, the laws of the Republic, and international acts recognized by Tajikistan. In implementing rights and freedoms, limitations in the Constitution and laws are allowed only to ensure the rights and freedoms of others, [the] public order, and to safeguard the constitutional system and the territorial integrity of the Republic. Article 15. A person is regarded as a citizen of Tajikistan if he is a citizen of the Republic of Tajikistan on the day of the adoption of the Constitution. Any connection between the citizenship of Tajikistan and the citizenship of another State is not admissible, except in cases foreseen by the law and interstate treaties of Tajikistan. The procedure for acquiring and forfeiting citizenship is defined by law. Article 16. A citizen of Tajikistan outside the country will be protected by the State. No citizen of the Republic will be extradited to a foreign State. Extradition of a criminal to a foreign State will be allowed on the basis of mutual agreement. Foreign citizens and stateless persons are accorded the rights and freedoms and have the responsibilities and duties of citizens of Tajikistan except in cases specified by law. Tajikistan will offer political asylum to foreign citizens who are victims of human rights violations. Article 17. All are equal before the law and the courts. The State guarantees the rights and freedoms of every person regardless of nationality, race, sex, language, religious beliefs, political persuasion, education, social status, and property. Men and women have the same rights.

Article 18. Every person has the right to life. No one can be deprived of life except by order of the courts for a specially serious crime. The State guarantees the inviolability of a person. No one will be subjected to torture, punishment, and inhuman treatment. It is prohibited to subject a person to forced medical or scientific experiments. Article 19. Every person is guaranteed judicial protection. Every person is entitled to demand that his case be considered by a competent and impartial court. No one can be arrested, kept in custody and exiled without a legal basis. Every person is entitled to legal assistance from the moment of his arrest. Article 20. No one is considered guilty of a crime except by the sentence of a court in accordance with the law. No one carries responsibility if the term of investigation expires or his committed action is not regarded as a crime. No one can be tried twice for one [and the same] crime. A law which is adopted after the commission of an illegal act by a person that envisages severe punishment for that act shall not be retroactive. If, after the commission of an illegal act a punishment is not envisaged or a light punishment is envisaged, the new law is applicable. Total confiscation of the property of a convicted person is prohibited. Article 21. The law shall safeguard the rights of the victim. The State guarantees judicial protection and compensation to the victim. Article 22. The home of a person is inviolable. It is prohibited to enter the home of a person by force and deprive a person of a home except in cases anticipated by law. Article 23.

Privacy of correspondence, telephone conversations, and the postal and communication rights of each person are ensured, except in cases anticipated by law. The collection, storage, utilization, and dissemination of information about a person’s private life without his consent is forbidden. Article 24. Every citizen has the right to choose freely their place of residence, to leave the Republic and to return to it. Article 25. State bodies, social associations and officials are obliged to ensure that every person has the opportunity to seek and see documents affecting their rights and interests except in cases anticipated by law. Article 26. Every person has the right to determine freely their relationship towards religion, to profess any religion separately or together with others or not to profess any, and to take part in religious customs and ceremonies. Article 27. Every citizen has the right to take part in political life and State administration directly or through their representatives. Citizens have equal rights to State service. Every citizen has the right to elect or be elected from the age of 18. Citizens deemed incompetent by a court or who have been deprived of liberty in accordance with a court sentence do not have the right to take part in elections and referenda. Elections and referenda are held on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage in a secret ballot. Article 28. Every person has the right of assembly. A person has the right to voluntarily join and leave political parties, trade unions, and other social associations. Article 29.

Citizens have the right, within the law, to take part in meetings, rallies, demonstrations and peaceful processions. No one can be forced to take part in the aforementioned activities. Article 30. Everyone is guaranteed freedom of speech, publishing and the right to use means of mass information. State censorship and prosecution for criticism is prohibited. The list of information constituting a State secret is defined by law. Article 31. A citizen has the right to appeal personally or together with a group of people to the authorities. Article 32. Everyone has the right to ownership and inheritance. No one is permitted to suspend and limit the individual's right to ownership. The property of an individual is taken away only on the basis of the law, with the consent of the owner and to meet the requirements of the State and society, and with the State paying full compensation. Any material and moral damage inflicted on an individual as a result of illegal actions by State bodies, social associations or individuals will be compensated in accordance with the law. Article 33. The State protects the family as the basis of society. Everyone has the right to form a family. Men and women who have reached the age of marriage have the right to marry freely without any hindrance. In family relations [matters] and in divorce, husband and wife have equal rights. Polygamy is prohibited. Article 34. A mother and child are entitled to special care and protection by the State. Parents are responsible for the upbringing of children and adult children of working age are responsible for care and provision of parents.

The State provides protection, upbringing and education of orphaned children and the disabled. Article 35. Everyone has the right to work, to choose their profession or job and to have work protection. Wages for work cannot be less than the minimum wage. Any limitation is prohibited in labor relations. Equal wages shall be paid for equal work. Forced labor is not permitted, except in cases defined by law. Using women and child labor is prohibited in heavy and underground works and in harmful conditions. Article 36. Everyone has the right to housing. This right is ensured by means of construction of State, public, cooperative and private housing. Article 37. Citizens have the right to rest. This right is ensured by establishing working weeks, hours and days, paid annual leaves, weekly days off and other conditions encompassed by law. Article 38. Everyone has the right to health care. This right is ensured by providing free medical assistance in State medical establishments and by measures aimed at protecting the environment, developing mass sport, physical training, and tourism. Other forms of medical assistance one can receive are defined by law. Article 39. Everyone is guaranteed social security in old age, in the event of sickness and disability, loss of ability to work, or loss of a guardian or other instances specified by law. Article 40. Everyone has the right freely to take part in the cultural life of society, artistic, scientific, and technical creation, and to use their achievements. The State protects cultural and spiritual treasures. Intellectual property is protected by law.

Article 41. Everyone has the right to education. The basic general education is compulsory. The State guarantees access to free general, secondary, vocational, and according to abilities based on competition, general specialized and higher education, in the State educational establishments. Other forms of acquiring education are defined by law. Article 42. On the territory of Tajikistan, everyone is obliged to observe the Constitution and the laws and to recognize the rights, freedoms, dignity and honor of others. Ignorance of the law is no excuse from responsibility. Article 43. The protection of the homeland, safeguarding the interests of the State, and strengthening the independence, security and defense capabilities of the homeland are the sacred duties of citizens. The procedure for military service is specified by law. Article 44. The protection of the natural, historical and cultural heritage is the duty of everyone. Article 45. Everyone is obliged to pay taxes and duties specified by law. Laws introducing new taxes or making the economic situation of the taxpayer difficult are not retroactive. Article 46. In case of a real threat to the rights and freedoms of the citizens, the independence of the State, its territorial integrity, natural disasters, as a result of which the constitutional organs are unable to function normally, as a temporary measure, for the assurance of safety of the citizens and the State, a state of emergency is declared. The period of a state of emergency is up to three months. The President of Tajikistan can prolong this period in necessary cases. Article 47.

During a state of emergency the rights and freedoms specified in Articles 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25 and 28 of the Constitution cannot be limited. The Supreme Assembly is not dissolved during the period of a state of emergency. The legal regime of a state of emergency is determined by a constitutional law. Chapter Three The Supreme Assembly Article 48. The Supreme Assembly is the highest representative and legislative body of the Republic of Tajikistan. The Supreme Assembly is elected for a five-year term. A citizen can be elected to the Supreme Assembly when he reaches the age of 25. The establishment and activity of the Supreme Assembly are specified by a constitutional law. Article 49. The powers of the Supreme Assembly [are]: 1. the enactment and amending of laws and orders and their annulment; 2. interpretation of the Constitution and laws; 3. determination of the basic directions of the domestic and foreign policy of the State; 4. establishment of the Central Electoral and Referendum Commission; 5. scheduling the date for a referendum; 6. suggesting draft laws and other important issues of the State and society for a nationwide referenda; 7. specifying the date for election of the President; 8. specifying the date for election of higher and local representative bodies; 9. approving the establishment and abolition of Ministries and State committees;

10. the ratification of the decrees of the President on appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other members of the Government; 11. the ratification of the decrees of the President on appointment and dismissal of the Chairman of the National Bank and his deputies: 12. the election and removal of the Chairman, deputy chairmen and judges of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Economic Court on the proposal of the President of the Republic; 13. approving the election and removal of the Procurator General and his deputies; 14. the ratification of socioeconomic programs and approval of economic assistance to other States; 15. the ratification of the State budget, determination of the possible amount of the State budget deficit and the sources of compensation for it, supervision over the execution of the budget, and also the determination of taxation and credit policy; 16. definitions of the monetary system; 17. specifying the structure, establishing, abolishing, and changing of administrative territorial units in necessary circumstances; 18. ratification and annulment of international treaties; 19. establishment of courts; 20. ratification of the decrees of the President on a state of war, and a state of emergency; 21. establishing State awards; 22. establishing military and diplomatic ranks and other special titles; 23. approval of State symbols; 24. declaration of general amnesty; 25. annulment of the decrees of the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly contradicting the Constitution and other laws; 26. implementation of other duties specified by the Constitution and laws. Article 50. The basic form of the activity of the Supreme Assembly is the session.

A session of the Supreme Assembly is convened by the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly not less than twice a year. A session of the Supreme Assembly convenes only when attended by at least two-thirds of the People’s Deputies. The first session of the Supreme Assembly is convened by the Central Electoral and Referendum Commission one month after the election of People’s Deputies. Article 51. For the purpose of organizing the work of the Supreme Assembly and the implementation of the powers specified by the Constitution and the laws, the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly under the leadership of the Chairman of the Supreme Assembly will be established. The composition of the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly includes the Chairman of the Supreme Assembly, the first deputy chairman, deputy chairmen, and chairmen of the committees and standing commissions of the Supreme Assembly. The Supreme Assembly can elect other People’s Deputies as members of the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly. Article 52. The Presidium of the Supreme Assembly has authority: 1. to convene the Supreme Assembly; 2. to prepare for sessions of the Supreme Assembly; 3. to coordinate the work of the committees and standing commissions of the Supreme Assembly; 4. to organize inter-parliamentary relations; 5. to oversee the activities of the publications of the Supreme Assembly and to appoint and dismiss editors-in-chief of the publications; 6. to approve the appointment of or recall the heads of diplomatic missions of Tajikistan in foreign countries and missions of the Republic to international organizations; 7. to implement other powers defined in the Constitution and other laws. The Presidium of the Supreme Assembly adopts decisions within the framework of its authority.

Article 53. The Supreme Assembly elects from among the People’s Deputies the Chairman of the Supreme Assembly, the first deputy chairman, deputy chairmen, and chairmen of the committees and standing commissions of the Supreme Assembly. One of the deputy chairmen of the Supreme Assembly will be a People’s Deputy representing the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast. The Chairman of the Supreme Assembly will be elected by a secret ballot by a majority of the total number of People’s Deputies. Article 54. The Chairman of the Supreme Assembly has authority: 1. to exercise leadership and direction over issues which will be discussed at the session; 2. to preside at the sessions of the Supreme Assembly and meetings of its Presidium; 3. to nominate the first deputy chairman, deputy chairmen and chairmen of the committees and standing commissions of the Supreme Assembly; 4. to sign the decisions of the Supreme Assembly and of its Presidium; 5. to represent the Supreme Assembly inside the country and abroad; 6. to sign inter-parliamentary agreements; 7. to direct the apparatus of the Supreme Assembly and to give orders; 8. to implement other powers specified in the Constitution and laws. Article 55. The first deputy chairman and deputy chairmen of the Supreme Assembly will carry out the duties of the Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, the first deputy chairman carries out his duties. Article 56. The Supreme Assembly will elect from among the People’s Deputies committees and standing commissions to prepare draft laws and to implement supervisory duties and preliminary preparation and discussion of the issues. The Supreme Assembly, in the event of necessity, will establish auditing and investigation commissions and other temporary commissions

Article 57. An official is obliged to provide a People’s Deputy with the information he needs to carry out his duties except in cases defined by law. A People’s Deputy can express his opinions freely, and vote according to his belief. Article 58. A People’s Deputy who is working for the Supreme Assembly on a permanent basis cannot hold any other post except for scientific and creative activities and cannot engage in economic entrepreneurship activity. Citizens of Tajikistan cannot hold two posts in the representative authority at the same time. Article 59. A People’s Deputy has the right of immunity. He cannot be taken into custody, arrested, or incur a court-imposed penalty without the sanction of the Supreme Assembly. A People’s Deputy cannot be arrested without the sanction of the Supreme Assembly with the exception of arrest while committing a crime. The authority of a People’s Deputy will terminate at his resignation or when he is proclaimed incapable by a court or by a valid decision of the Supreme Assembly. The legal status of a People’s Deputy is defined by a constitutional law. Article 60. The right of legislative initiative belongs to the People’s Deputies, the President, Government, the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, and the Assembly of People’s Deputies of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast. Article 61. The laws of Tajikistan and the decisions of the Supreme Assembly are adopted by majority vote of the total number of People’s Deputies. Constitutional laws are adopted by at least two-thirds of the total number of People’s Deputies. Article 62. Laws of Tajikistan are presented to the President for signing. If the President does not agree with the law he returns it within 15 days to the Supreme Assembly with reasons

and objections. If the Supreme Assembly once again approves the law with at least a twothirds majority of People’s Deputies, the President will sign it. If the President does not return the law within the prescribed period, he is duty bound to sign it. Article 63. The Supreme Assembly can be voluntarily suspended before its term ends with at least two-thirds of the vote of People’s Deputies. In all cases the authority of the People’s Deputies of Tajikistan terminates on the first day of the session of the new Supreme Assembly. Chapter Four The President Article 64. The President of the Republic of Tajikistan is the Head of State and executive power (of the Government). The President is the guarantor of the Constitution and the laws, the rights and freedoms of the citizens, national independence, unity, territorial integrity, stability, and continuity of the State, and the ensurer of the functioning of the organs of State power and observance of international treaties of Tajikistan. Article 65. The President is elected by the citizens of Tajikistan on the basis of universal, direct and equal suffrage in a secret ballot for a five-year term. Any citizen aged between 35 and 65 who knows the State language and has lived on the territory of Tajikistan at least for at least 10 years can be nominated to the post of President of he Republic. Only a person whose nomination is signed by at least 5% of the electorate shall be eligible for candidacy to the post of President. A person may not be elected to the office of President for more than two consecutive terms. Article 66. The election of the President is deemed valid if more than one-half of the electorate takes part in it.

A candidate who wins votes with more than one-half of the voters taking part in the elections shall be the President. The procedure for the election of the President is specified by a constitutional law. Article 67. The President, before assuming office, takes the following oath in the Supreme Assembly: “I, as President, do solemnly swear to comply with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic; to guarantee the rights, freedoms, honor, and dignity of the citizens, to protect the territorial integrity and the political, economic and cultural independence of Tajikistan; and to faithfully serve the people.” The power of the President terminates with the swearing-in of the new President. Article 68. The President does not have the right to be engaged in any other office. He cannot serve as a Deputy of representative bodies and cannot engage in entrepreneurial activity. The salary of the president is set by the Supreme Assembly. Article 69. The President of the Republic of Tajikistan [has the authority]: 1. to represent Tajikistan within the country and in international relations; 2. to establish or abolish ministries and State committees with the approval of the Supreme Assembly; 3. to appoint and dismiss the Prime Minister, and other members of the Government and to present decrees concerning these to the Supreme Assembly for confirmation; 4. to appoint and dismiss the Chairman of the National Bank and his deputies and to present decrees concerning these to the Supreme Assembly for confirmation; 5. to form the executive apparatus of the presidency; 6. to appoint and dismiss the Chairmen of Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, city of Dushanbe, towns and rayons, and to present decrees concerning these to the relevant assemblies of People’s Deputies. 7. to nominate the Chairman, deputy chairman and judges of the Constitutional Court; the Chairman, deputy chairman and judges of the Supreme Court; the Chairman, deputy

chairman and judges of the Supreme Economic Court; and to present decrees concerning these to the Supreme Assembly for confirmation; 8. to appoint and dismiss the Procurator General and his deputies with the consent of the Supreme Assembly; 9. to appoint and dismiss the judges of the military courts, courts of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, city of Dushanbe, towns and rayons at the proposal of the Justice Minister; 10. to be in charge of the Reserve Fund and inform the Supreme Assembly about its expenditure; 11. to make proposals to the Supreme Assembly to determine the monetary system; 12. to sign laws; 13. to annul or suspend documents of State administration if they contradict the Constitution and laws; 14. to lead the implementation of foreign policy, sign international treaties and submit them for approval to the Supreme Assembly; 15. to appoint, with the approval of the Presidium of the Supreme Assembly, the heads of diplomatic missions in foreign countries and representatives of the Republic in international organizations 16. to accept the credentials of foreign diplomatic missions; 17. to be supreme commander-in-chief of the armed forces of Tajikistan; to appoint and dismiss commanders of the armed forces of Tajikistan; 18. in the event of real danger threatening the security of the State to declare a state of war and immediately submit the decree to the Supreme Assembly for approval; 19. to declare a state of emergency throughout the Republic or in separate parts of it and propose it to the Supreme Assembly immediately for approval and to inform the United Nations Organization; 20. to establish and lead the Security Council; 21. to offer political asylum; 22. to resolve the issues of citizenship; 23. to issue pardon from punishment;

24. to award higher military, diplomatic, and other special ranks; 25. to award to citizens State prizes, and honorary titles of Tajikistan; 26. to implement other powers specified in the Constitution and laws . Article 70. The President issues orders and decrees within the framework of his authority, informs the Supreme Assembly about the country’s situation, and submits necessary and important issues for discussion to the Supreme Assembly. Article 71. In case of the President’s death, resignation, removal from office or inability to perform his duties, the duties of the President will be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Supreme Assembly until new presidential elections. In this case, the duties of the Chairman of the Supreme Assembly will be the responsibility of his first deputy. Presidential elections are held within three months in the aforementioned cases. Issues related to inability of the President to perform his duties will be resolved by the majority of People’s Deputies at the session of the Supreme Assembly, except cases that are specified in Article 72. Article 72. The President enjoys immunity. In the case of breaking his oath and committing a crime, the President can be removed from his office by the Supreme Assembly, taking into account conclusions of the Constitutional Court and the special commission of the Supreme Assembly with the support of at least two-thirds of the People’s Deputies. Issues related to the breaking of the presidential oath and commission of a crime should be put forward by at least one-third of People’s Deputies. In such case the duties of the Chairman of the special session of the Supreme Assembly will be the responsibility of the Chairman of the Supreme Court. The People’s Deputies take an oath that they will act with a clear conscience and within the framework of the law and justice during the discussion of this issue. The investigation is continued after the President is removed from his office; he is accused and his criminal case is sent to court. Chapter Five The Government

Article 73. The composition of the Government consists of the Prime Minister, his first deputy, deputies, ministers and chairmen of State committees. The Government ensures the effective leadership in the functioning of the economy, the social and spiritual spheres and the implementation of laws and decrees of the Supreme Assembly and orders and decrees of the President of Tajikistan. The members of the Government do not have the right to perform other duties, be Deputies of representative organs, or engage in economic entrepreneurship activity. Article 74. The Government issues orders and decrees in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the Republic, the implementation of which is compulsory in the territory of Tajikistan. The Government leaves office when a new President is elected. The Government can ask the President for its resignation if it deems necessary that it cannot function normally. Every member of the Government has the right to resign. The structure, activity and powers of the Government are determined by a constitutional law. Article 75. The Government submits to the Supreme Assembly economic and social programs, policies of granting State loan and economic assistance to other countries, draft State budgets, and issues related to an acceptable amount of the State budget deficit and its source of compensation. Chapter Six Local Government Article 76. Local government consists of representative and executive organs and functions within the framework of their powers. They ensure the implementation of the Constitution, laws and decrees of the Supreme Assembly and the President. Article 77. The local representative organ in oblasts, towns and rayons is the Assembly of People’s Deputies, which is guided by the Chairman. The People’s Deputies of the local Assembly are elected for a five-year term.

The Assembly of People’s Deputies approves the local budget and reports on its implementation, determines the ways of economic and social development of the area, determines in accordance with the law local taxes and their payments, determines the ways of ruling and possessing communal properties within the framework of the law, and implements other powers specified in the Constitution and laws. Article 78. The local executive government is governed by the President’s representative Chairman of oblast, town, and rayon. The representative and executive authority in administrative and border units is headed by the Chairman. The President is to appoint and dismiss Chairmen of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, city of Dushanbe, towns, and rayons and to present decrees concerning these to the relevant Assemblies of People’s Deputies. The Chairman is responsible before the higher executive bodies and relevant Assembly of People’s Deputies. The organ of self-government of a settlement and village is the local Jamoat. The structure, powers, and activity of the organs of local self-government are regulated by a constitutional law. Article 79. The representative organs and the Chairman adopt legal acts within the framework of their authority, the implementation of which is compulsory in that territory. In the case of the acts not conforming to the Constitution and law, the acts of the representative authorities and the Chairman are revoked by the aforementioned authorities or the court. Article 80. The Supreme Assembly can dissolve the Assembly of People’s Deputies of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, city of Dushanbe, towns, and rayons and hold new elections if they do not systematically fulfill the demands of the Constitution and law. Chapter Seven The Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast Article 81.

The Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast is an integral and indivisible part of the Republic of Tajikistan. Changing the territory of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast is prohibited without the consent of the Assembly of People’s Deputies. Article 82. The People’s Deputies of Tajikistan from the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast are elected in accordance with norms specified by the law regardless of the size of the population. Article 83. The power of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast in social, economic, cultural and other spheres is determined by a constitutional law. Chapter Eight The Courts Article 84. The judicial power is independent and protects the rights and freedom of persons, the interests of the State, organizations and establishments and legality and justice. The judicial power is implemented by the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, the Military Court, the Court of Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, courts of oblasts, the city of Dushanbe, towns and rayons. The organization and procedure of the courts are determined by a constitutional law. The term of authority of the judges is five years. The creation of exceptional courts is prohibited. Article 85. Citizens who have attained the age of 30 and are no older than 60 and have at least five years’ experience in the legal profession may be elected as the judges of the Supreme Court, Supreme Economic Court, Military Court, courts of oblasts and the city of Dushanbe. Citizens who have attained the age of 25 and are no older than 60 and have at least three years’ experience in the legal profession can be elected the judges of towns and rayons. Article 86.

The President appoints and removes from office the judges of the Military Court, courts of Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast, oblasts, the city of Dushanbe, towns and rayons by proposals of the Minister of Justice. Article 87. Judges are independent and are subordinate only to the Constitution and law. Interference in their activity is prohibited. Article 88. Judges consider the work collectively and individually. Court proceedings are carried out on the basis of the adversarial system and the equal rights of the parties. The examination of cases in all courts is public except the cases which are specified in law. Court proceedings take place in the official language or the language of the majority of the population of the place. People who do not know the language of the court proceedings are provided with translators. Article 89. The Constitutional Court consists of seven judges, one of whom is a representative of the Gornyy Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast. Citizens who have attained the age of 30 and are no older than 60 and who have 10 years’ experience in the legal profession maybe judges of the Constitutional Court. The powers of the Constitutional Court are: 1. to determine the conformity of laws with the Constitution and legal acts of the Supreme Assembly, the President, Government, Supreme Court, Supreme Economic Court and other State and social authorities, as well as agreements which have not entered into force in Tajikistan; 2. to resolve disputes between the State organs on their competence; 3. the implementation of other duties specified by the Constitution and laws. A decision of the Constitutional Court is final. Article 90.

Judges cannot perform other duties, be Deputies of representative authorities, members of political parties and organizations, or engage in economic entrepreneurship activity except scientific, teaching and creative work. Article 91. Judges enjoy immunity. A judge may not be subject to arrest and criminal proceedings without the permission of that authority that has elected him. A judge may not be arrested except while committing a crime. Article 92. Legal assistance is guaranteed in all stages of court proceedings. The organization and functioning of attorneys and other forms of legal assistance are regulated by a constitutional law. Chapter Nine The Procurator’s Office Article 93. The Procurator General and the procurators who are subordinate to him ensure the thorough control and observance of the laws within the framework of their authority in the territory of Tajikistan. Article 94. The Procurator General heads a single centralized system of the Procurator’s Office of Tajikistan. The Procurator General is answerable to the Supreme Assembly and the President. Article 95. The Procurator General of Tajikistan is elected for a five-year term. The Procurator General appoints and removes from office those procurators who are subordinate to him. The term of authority of procurators is five years. The law regulates the activity, authority and structure of the Procurator’s Office. Article 96.

The Procurator General and the procurators who are subordinate to him function independently without interference from State bodies and officials; they are only subordinate to law. Article 97. The procurator may not perform other duties, be a member of political parties and organizations, or engage in economic entrepreneurship activity except scientific, teaching and creative work. Chapter Ten Procedure for Constitutional Amendments Article 98. Amendments and addenda to the Constitution take place by means of a referendum. A referendum takes place if two-thirds of the People’s Deputies voted in favor [of the referendum]. The procedure for a referendum is determined by a constitutional law. Article 99. The President or at least one-third of the People’s Deputies of Tajikistan submit addenda and amendments to the Constitution. Proposals related to addenda and amendments to the Constitution are published in the press three months before the referendum. Article 100. The republican form of government, the territorial unity, the democratic law-governed and secular and social nature of the State are unchangeable.

