CONSTITUTIONS

of
NATIONS
The first compilation in the English language of the texts of the constitutions of the various nations of the world, together with summaries, annotations, bibliographies, and comparative tables

VOLUME III PORTUGAL to YUGOSLAVIA

by

AMOS J. PEASLEE
Secretary General of the International Bar Association, Member of the American Council of Learned Societies, former President of the American Branch of the International Law Association, Representative of the American Society of International Law at the San Francisco Conference of 1945, Associate of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Versailles in 1919 Author of A PERMANENT UNITED NATIONS (Putnams, 1942), TU(PEuDtnNaAmsI,O194S5G)VdRMENT author of THREE WARS WITH GERMANY (Putnams, 1944)

Copyright 1950 by Amos J. PEASLEE

THE RUMFORD PRESS CONCORD, N. H.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THAILAND
March 23, 19491
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 1. Thailand is a Kingdom, one and indivisible. Sec. 2. Thailand is a democratic state with the King as the Head of State. Sec. 3. The sovereign power emanates from the Thai people. The King, as the Head of State, exercises such power in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution. Sec. 4. A person acquires and loses Thai nationality in accordance with the provisions of the law governing nationality.
CHAPTER II THE KING

Sec. 5. The person of the King is sacred and inviolable. Sec. 6. No person may, in any manner whatsoever, prefer a charge or bring an action against the King. Sec. 7. The King professes the Buddhist Faith and upholds religions. Sec. 8. The King exercises the legislative power through Parliament. Sec. 9. The King exercises the executive power through the Council of Ministers. Sec. 10. The King exercises the judicial power through the Courts. Sec. 11. The King is the Head of the Thai Forces. He is the Supreme Commander of all the Armed Forces. Sec. 12. The King may exercise His prerogative in creating titles and conferring decorations. Sec. 13. The King selects and appoints qualified persons as members of the Privy Council which consists of the President of the Privy Council and not more than eight other Privy Councillors. The Privy Council is charged with the duty of advising the King, upon Royal Command, on all matters concerning the exercise of His functions and with such other duties as provided in this Constitution. Sec. 14. The selection, appointment and retirement of Privy Councillors shall be at the King's pleasure. The appointment and retirement of the President of the Privy Council by Royal Command shall be countersigned by the Speaker of Parliament. The appointment and retirement of other Privy Councillors by Royal Command shall be countersigned by the President of the Privy Council. Sec. 15. No person may be appointed a Privy Councillor who is a permanent Government official, Minister of State or official holding any

other political post, member of the Senate or of the House of Representatives, member or officer of a political party, or who shows active sympathies for a political party. Sec. 16. Before taking office a Privy Councillor must make a solemn declaration in the presence of the King in the following words:

"I (naming the person making the declaration) do solemnly pledge my honor and loyalty to His Majesty King (naming the reigning Monarch) and my service to the country and to the people. I do solemnly declare that I will uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Sec. 17. The office of a Privy Councillor is vacated upon death,
resignation or Royal Command. Sec. 18. The appointment and retirement of officials in the Royal Household as well as the King's Chief Aide-de-Camp General shall be at the King's own pleasure. Such an appointment or retirement by Royal Command shall be countersigned by a Privy Councillor. Sec. 19. Should the King be absent from the Kingdom or for any reason whatsoever be unable to carry out His functions, He shall have appointed some person to be Regent with the approval of Parliament. Such an appointment by Royal Command shall be countersigned by the Speaker of Parliament. Sec. 20. Should no Regent be appointed by the King under Section 19 or should the King, by reason of His being a minor or for any other reason whatsoever, be unable to appoint the Regent, the Privy Council shall nominate a person who is fit to occupy the office of Regent to Parliament for approval. Upon approval by Parliament a public notice shall be made by the Speaker of Parliament in the name of the King appointing the said person as Regent. Sec. 21. Pending the appointment of the Regent as provided by Section 19 or Section 20 the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily act as Regent. Should the Regent appointed under Section 19 or Section 20, for any reason whatsoever be unable to discharge his duties, the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily act in the place of the Regent. While acting as Regent under the first paragraph or acting in the place of the Regent under paragraph two, the President of the Privy Council is debarred from discharging his duties as President of the Privy Council. Should the President of the Privy Council, for any reason whatsoever, be unable to discharge his duties, the Privy Council shall elect one of its members to serve temporarily as President. Sec. 22. Before taking office the Regent appointed under Section 19 or Section 20 must make a solemn declaration before the assembly of Parliament in the following words: "I (naming the person making the declaration) do solemnly pledge my

honor and loyalty to His Majesty King (naming the reigning Monarch) and my service to the country and to the people. I do solemnly declare that I will uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Sec. 23. Subject to the approval of Parliament, succession to the
Throne shall be governed by the Law on Succession B.E.2467.1

The Law on Succession B.E.2467 shall not be repealed or amended. Sec. 24. The King becomes sui juris upon completing His eighteen years of age. Sec. 25. Should there be a vacancy of the Throne, the Privy Council shall name the Heir to the Throne as provided in the Law on Succession B.E.2467 to Parliament for approval. Upon approval by Parliament the Speaker of Parliament shall invite such Heir to assume the Throne and cause Him to be publicly proclaimed as King. Pending the proclamation of succession under this section the Regent, if appointed under Section 19 or Section 20, shall discharge his duties as Regent for the time being. If there is no such Regent, the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily act as Regent. In the case where the President of the Privy Council acts as Regent under the foregoing paragraph, the provisions of Section 21 paragraph three and paragraph four shall apply.
CHAPTER III RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF THE THAI PEOPLE

Sec. 26. All persons, irrespective of birth or religion, are under the same protection of the Constitution. Sec. 27. All persons are equal before the law. Titles acquired by birth, by bestowal or by any other manner do not confer any privilege whatsoever. Sec. 28. A person enjoys full liberty to profess any religion, religious sect or religious creed and to exercise the form of worship in accordance with his own belief, so far as it is not contrary to his duties as a national or to public order or good morals. In exercising the liberty referred to in the foregoing paragraph a person is protected against any act of discrimination by the State which is prejudicial to his rights or detrimental to his due benefit for the reason that the religion, religious sect or religious creed he professes or the form of worship he exercises differs from those of others. Sec. 29. No person may be punished for any act committed by him unless such an act be declared to be a punishable offense by the law in force at the time. No punishment for an offense may be inflicted upon a person which is heavier than the punishment provided by the law in force at the time of his committing the offense. Sec. 30. In all criminal cases, the accused or defendant shall be presumed to be innocent. Before the passing of a final judgment convicting a person of the commission of an offense he may not be given the treatment prescribed for a convict. The application for bail by the accused or defendant in a criminal case shall receive consideration and excessive bail shall not be required. Refusal of bail must be based upon the principles specially provided by law and a notice of the reason therefor must be given to the accused or defendant. A person under detention or undergoing a term of imprisonment is entitled, within reason, to receive visitors. Sec. 31. A person enjoys full liberty of the person. No person may, under any circumstances whatsoever, be arrested, detained or searched except by virtue of the power determined by law,

and provided always that the person subject to the arrest or search shall, without delay, be given notice of the reason for the arrest or search together with reasonable particulars. A person subject to detention is entitled to meet and consult his lawyer in private. When a person is detained such a person himself, the public prosecutor or any other person acting in the interests of the person so detained may submit a complaint to the local Court having criminal jurisdiction that the detention is unlawful. Upon such a complaint being lodged the Court shall at once proceed to conduct an ex parte hearing thereof. If in its findings the complaint is substantiated the Court shall have power to order the person responsible for the detention to produce the person detained forthwith before its presence. In such a case if the person responsible for the detention cannot show to the satisfaction of the Court that the detention is lawful the Court shall order instant release of the person detained. Sec. 32. Forced labor may be procured only by virtue of the power determined by special law for the purpose of warding off an imminent public calamity, or by virtue of the power determined by the law which permits its procurement during a time of war, state of war, state of emergency as declared by Royal Command, or during the period when martial law is declared. Sec. 33. The dwelling of a person is inviolable. The right belonging to a person to enjoy peaceful habitation in and peaceful possession of his dwelling is guaranteed. An entry into such a dwelling without his permission or a search thereof may be made only by virtue of the power determined by law. Sec. 34. The right belonging to a person to private property is guaranteed. The scope and limitations of such a right are determined by law. The right of inheritance is guaranteed. Succession in private inheritance is governed by law. Immovable property may be expropriated only by virtue of the power determined by special law for the purpose of public utility, direct defense of the realm, or exploitation of natural resources, provided always, that just compensation be given to the owner and to persons whose right to compensation is recognized and specified in the law on expropriation of immovable property and who suffer loss thereby. Entry upon immovable property belonging to a person without his permission for use or possession by State officials or a requisition of movable property by the State may be made only by virtue of the power determined by special law for the purpose of maintaining public safety or warding off a public calamity, provided always that just compensation be given to persons who suffer loss thereby. Sec. 35. A person enjoys full liberty of speech, writing, printing and publication. Such liberty may be restricted only by the provisions of special law enacted for the purpose of safeguarding the liberties of subjects, avoiding a state of emergency, maintaining public order or good morals or protecting youths against moral degeneration. No printing establishment shall be closed down nor an order made forbidding publishing work therein to the prejudice of the liberty guaranteed by this section.

No censorship of newspapers may be imposed except during a time of war, state of war, state of emergency as declared by Royal Command or during the period when martial law is declared. Nevertheless, no such censorship may be imposed except by virtue of the power determined by the law enacted under the provisions of the second paragraph. No money or other property shall be given by the State as subsidy to any newspapers. Sec. 36. A person enjoys full liberty with respect to education, so far as it is not contrary to his duties as a national as provided by the laws governing education and organization of educational institutions. Educational institutions belonging to the State as well as the municipalities must give equal facilities to all persons to receive education in accordance with their ability. Sec. 37. A person enjoys full liberty to assemble peaceably and without arms. Such liberty may be restricted only by the provisions of special law governing public meetings for the purpose of preserving the public right of access to public places or maintaining public order during a time of war, state of war, state of emergency as declared by Royal Command or during the period when martial law is declared. Sec. 38. A person enjoys full liberty of association if the object thereof is not unlawful. The formation and operation of an association is governed by law. Sec. 39. All persons enjoy full liberty to form and operate a political party by democratic means so far as it is not inconsistent with the form of government determined by this Constitution. The provisions of law governing associations shall not be applied to a political party. Sec. 40. All persons enjoy full liberty of communicating with one another by post or other lawful means. Communications between persons by post, telegraph, telephone or other means may be searched, detained or revealed only by virtue of the power determined by law. All persons have equal right to employ the means of communication provided for public use. Sec. 41. A person enjoys full liberty of choosing his domicile within the Kingdom as well as his occupation. Such liberty may be restricted only by the provisions of special law for the purpose of preserving the safety of the realm, the economic stability of the nation or the public welfare or of maintaining family relations. Thai nationals shall not be expelled from the Kingdom. Sec. 42. A person has the right, either by himself or in conjunction with others, to present a petition under the conditions and in the manner determined by law. Sec. 43. Family rights are guaranteed. Sec. 44. The right of a person to sue a branch of the Government which is a juristic person responsible for acts done by any of its officials as if it were a principal or employer is guaranteed. Sec. 45. Members of the Armed Forces and police force, other officials in the permanent service, and municipal officers enjoy the same rights and liberties accorded to citizens by this Constitution unless they are

subject to restrictions determined by law, by-laws or regulations issued by virtue of law so far as it concerns political activities, efficiency or discipline.
CHAPTER IV DUTIES OF THE THAI PEOPLE

Sec. 46. A person has the duty to defend the country. Sec. 47. A person has the duty to undergo military service as determined by law. Sec. 48. A person has the duty to preserve the form of government as determined by this Constitution. Sec. 49. A person has the duty to respect the law. Sec. 50. In exercising his right in an election or a plebiscite a person has the duty to act in good faith and for the common interest. Sec. 51. A person has the duty to pay taxes and duties as determined by law. Sec. 52. A person has the duty to assist the Administration as determined by law. Sec. 53. A person has the duty to receive primary education under the conditions and in the manner determined by law.
CHAPTER V STATE POLICIES

Sec. 54. The provisions in this chapter are enacted as guidance for legislative and administrative work to be conducted in accordance with defined policies and do not give rise to any cause of action against the State. Sec. 55. The State shall preserve the national independence. Sec. 56. The State shall promote friendly relations with foreign nations and adopt the principle of reciprocity in its dealings with other nations. Sec. 57. The State shall cooperate with other nations in maintaining international justice and world peace. Sec. 58. Armed Forces shall be maintained in so far as necessary for the preservation of the national independence. Sec. 59. The Armed Forces belong to the nation. They are under the supreme command of the King and are not subject to the direction of any individual, group of persons or political party. Sec. 60. The Armed Forces may be mobilized only for the purpose of waging war or being engaged in a state of war or of quelling a rebellion. Mobilization may only be ordered by Royal Command except in the case of declaration of martial law. The use of the Armed Forces for the purpose of giving assistance to the Administration shall be governed by law. Sec. 61. No individual, group of persons or political party may directly or indirectly use the Armed Forces as a political instrument. While engaged in the service no person in the Armed Forces or subject to military jurisdiction may become a member or officer of any political party or show active sympathies for any political party. Sec. 62. Education shall have as its aim the development among the Thai people of good citizenship, sound body and health, knowledge and ability to earn their living and a democratic spirit.

Sec. 63. The State shall foster and support education. It is the sole duty of the State to set up an educational system. All educational institutions are under the control and supervision of the State. The State shall make arrangements to enable academic institutions to manage their own affairs within the scope defined by law. Sec. 64. Primary education in educational institutions set up by the State as well as by the municipalities shall be provided free of charge. The State shall assist in furnishing educational equipments to a reasonable extent. Sec. 65. The State shall support research in arts and science. Sec. 66. The State shall preserve the national culture, provided that no compulsory measures be taken against the will of any person. Sec. 67. The State shall maintain and preserve places and objects of historical, cultural and artistic value and take measures to prevent the export of such objects out of the Kingdom. Sec. 68. Private economic initiative shall be free so far as it is not inconsistent with the operation of public utilities or prejudicial to humanity, social stability or liberties of the subjects. The State shall take measures to coordinate the operations of public utilities and private economic enterprises so as to benefit the common whole. Monopolies and public utilities may be operated by private persons only by virtue of the power determined by law. Sec. 69. The State shall encourage and support agricultural pursuits with a view to increasing agricultural produce both in quantity and quality. To that end it shall support cooperative movements. Sec. 70. The State shall support private trade and production in agriculture and industry. Sec. 71. The State shall take reasonable measures to prevent exploitation of child labor beyond its physical fitness. Sec. 72. The State shall maintain public health and provide for maternal and child welfare. The prevention and suppression of epidemics shall be operated by the State without charge to the people.
CHAPTER

VI

LEGISLATIVE POWER

Part 1
General Provisions Sec. 73. Parliament is composed of a Senate and a House of Representatives. Whether Parliament shall sit separately or jointly is determined by the provisions of this Constitution. Sec. 74. The Speaker of the Senate is the Speaker of Parliament. The Speaker of the House of Representatives is the Vice-Speaker of Parliament. It is the duty of the Speaker of Parliament to conduct the proceedings in Parliament sitting jointly in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and to carry out other duties entrusted to him by the provisions of this Constitution.

The Vice-Speaker shall act in the place of the Speaker when the latter is, for any reason, unable to perform his duties. Sec. 75. Bills can be promulgated as law only by and with the advice and consent of Parliament. Sec. 76. After a Bill has been passed by Parliament, the President of the Council of Ministers shall submit it to the King for signature, and it shall come into force after its publication in the Government Gazette. Sec. 77. If the King disapproves of a Bill and the Bill is or is not returned to Parliament within ninety days, Parliament shall reconsider the Bill. If Parliament reaffirms the Bill with a majority vote of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of both Houses, the President of the Council of Ministers shall resubmit the Bill to the king for signature. If the King does not return the Bill with His signature within thirty days, the Bill shall be published in the Government Gazette and come into force as if the King had signed it. Sec 78. No person may be a senator and a member of the House of Representatives at the same time. Sec. 79. No person may be a senator or a member of the House of Representatives who is a permanent Government official. Sec. 80. Senators and members of the House of Representatives
(1) Shall not hold or remain in a remunerative post or office under the State, a branch of the Government or any service under the direction and control of the State, excluding the post of a Minister of State or other political official, the post required by law to be filled by a Minister of State, the post filled by the appointment of Parliament, the Senate or the House of Representatives and the post or office occupied by a. professor or lecturer in a university or other academic institution; (2) Shall not act as manager, director, adviser, agent or employee of a partnership or company in which the State or a branch of the Government invests in or holds more than fifty per centum of the total capital

or shares;

(3) Shall not directly or indirectly acquire or hold a concession from the State or a branch of the Government or be a party to a contract which is in the nature of a monopoly with the State or a branch of the Government; (4) Shall not receive money or any benefit from the State or a branch of the Government over and above what is paid or granted by the State or the branch of Government to other persons in the ordinary course of business, excluding money and benefit received in the capacity of a senator or a member of the House of Representatives as well as money and benefit received as compensation for acting in such a capacity.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to senators and members of the House of Representatives receiving annuities, compensations, pensions, grants to members of the Royal Family or such other payments made under obligation as specified in the yearly Budget. Nor shall they apply to senators and members of the House of Representatives who are appointed to or serve in a committee or commission and receive compensation at the rate fixed by law or Royal Decree. Sec. 81. Five or more senators or members of the House of Representatives may sign a complaint to the Speaker of their respective House asserting that any one of their number has become disqualified under the provisions of this Constitution. The Speaker with whom the complaint is lodged shall refer it to the Judicial Committee for the Constitution for decision.

The decision of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution shall be final and the said decision shall be communicated by the Committee to the Speaker with whom the complaint was lodged. Acts done by a member in the course of his duty before notice of the decision by the Judicial Committee for the Constitution disqualifying him was received by the Speaker of his House are not affected by the said decision.

Part 2
The Senate Sec. 82. The Senate is composed of one hundred members appointed by the King from among persons having electoral right who are not less than forty years of age and whom the King considers qualified by being experts or men of affairs capable of giving their service in the interests of the realm. The appointment of a senator by Royal Command shall be countersigned by the President of the Privy Council. Sec. 83. Membership in the Senate shall last for the duration of six years counting from the day of appointment by Royal Command. For the initial duration only, one-half of the members shall, at the termination of a period of three years, be replaced by new members and retire by the method of drawing lots. The King may exercise His prerogative in reappointing outgoing members. Sec. 84. Membership in the Senate terminates upon (1) Retirement by rotation; (2) Death; (3) Resignation; (4) Becoming disqualified under Section 80; (5) Becoming disfranchised under Section 90 (1), (2), (3) or (5) or Section 93 (1), (2) or (3); (6) Being sentenced by a judgment of the Court to a term of imprisonment, except for an offense committed by negligence, petty offense or offense punishable like a petty offense. Sec. 85. Upon a vacancy of membership in the Senate for any other reason than through retirement by rotation, the King shall have appointed a person qualified under Section 82 to fill it. The new member thus appointed may sit only for the remainder of the term of the retiring member. In appointing senators under this section the provisions of Section 82 paragraph two shall apply.

Part 3
The House of Representatives Sec. 86. The House of Representatives is composed of members elected by the people in a number and in accordance with the rule determined by Section 87. The election of members of the House of Representatives shall be decided by a direct and secret ballot under a system of combining the constituencies within the Changwad area. Sec. 87. One member shall be elected in each Changwad for one hundred and fifty thousand population, the population in such a Changwad

being calculated in accordance with the latest census. If the population in a Changwad does not amount to one hundred and fifty thousand, one member shall, nevertheless, be elected in such a Changwad. If the population in a Changwad exceeds one hundred and fifty thousand, an additional member shall be elected in such a Changwad for every one hundred and fifty thousand of the population. A fraction of one hundred and fifty thousand population amounting to seventy-five thousand or more shall be counted as one hundred and fifty thousand. Sec. 88. Persons who are qualified under Section 89 and are not disfranchised under Section 90 are entitled to vote in an election. Sec. 89. A person is entitled to vote in an election when he is qualified as follows: (1) Being a Thai national by law, provided that a Thai national whose father is an alien and a naturalized Thai subject shall, in addition, have other qualifications as provided by the law governing the election of members of the House of Representatives; (2) Being of twenty years of age or more on the election day. Sec. 90. A person who is under any of the following disabilities on the election day shall be disfranchised; (1) Being a person of unsound mind or mentally infirm; (2) Being deaf and dumb and incapable of reading and writing; (3) Being a priest, novice, monk or clergyman; (4) Being under detention by a warrant of the Court; (5) Being a person under disfranchisement by a judgment of the Court. Sec. 91. Persons having electoral right under Section 88 and qualified under Section 92 who are not disfranchised under Section 93 are entitled to stand as candidates in an election of members of the House of Representatives. However, so long as a person placed under detention has not been sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a judgment of the Court, the provisions of Section 90 (4) shall not apply. Sec. 92. A candidate in an election must have the following qualifications: (1) Being not less than thirty years of age on the election day; (2) Having passed the standard of primary education set by the Ministry of Education or being certified by the Ministry to have a knowledge equivalent thereto. Sec. 93. A person who is under any of the following disabilities may not stand for an election: (1) Being a drug addict; (2) Being blind; (3) Being an undischarged bankrupt; (4) Having been sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a judgment of the Court for two years or more, except for an offense committed by negligence, when a period of five years has not expired from the day of completing such a term of imprisonment to the day of election; (5) Being a permanent government official; (6) Having served as a permanent Government official, when a period of one year has not expired from the day of retirement to the day of election, excluding persons placed under compulsory service by the provisions of law. Sec. 94. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution the rule and procedure of election shall be determined by the law governing the election of members of the House of Representatives.

Sec. 95. The House of Representatives shall last for the duration of four years counting from the election day in the general election. Sec. 96. At the expiry of the duration the King shall have issued a Royal Decree ordering new members of the House of Representatives to be returned by a general election which shall be held within a period of sixty days from the said expiry. The election shall take place on the same day throughout the Kingdom. Sec. 97. The King may exercise His prerogatives in dissolving the House of Representatives so that new members may be returned by the people in an election. The dissolution shall be ordered by a Royal Decree in which the date of a general election shall be fixed within a period of ninety days. The election shall take place on the same day throughout the Kingdom. The House of Representatives may be dissolved only once under the same circumstances. Sec. 98. Membership in the House of Representatives begins on and from the day of election. Sec. 99. Membership in the House of Representatives terminates upon: (1) The expiry of the duration of the House or the dissolution of the House; (2) Death; (3) Resignation; (4) Becoming disqualified under Section 80; (5) Becoming disfranchised under Section 90 (1), (2), (3) or (5) or Section 93 (1), (2) or (3) ; (6) Being sentenced by a judgment of the Court to a term of imprisonment, except for an offense committed by negligence, petty offense or offense punishable like a petty offense. Sec. 100. If a vacancy occurs in the membership for any reason other than the expiry of the duration of the House of Representatives or the dissolution of the House, a new member shall be returned to fill the vacancy by an election held within a period of ninety days, unless the remainder of the duration of the House does not amount to one hundred and eighty days. The new member so returned may sit only for the remainder of the duration of the House of Representatives.

Part 4
Provisions Applicable to Both Houses Sec. 101. Senators and members of the House of Representatives are representatives of the Thai people. They are not bound by any imperative mandate and must for the common interest of the Thai people perform their duties in accordance with the honest dictates of their conscience. Sec. 102. Before taking office senators and members of the House of Representatives must make a solemn declaration before the assembly of their respective House in the following words: "I (naming the person making the declaration) do solemnly declare that I will perform my duties for the common interest of the Thai people in accordance with the dictates of my conscience. I will uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect."

Sec. 103. The Senate and the House of Representatives are each presided by a Speaker and a Vice-Speaker who are appointed by the King from the members of the respective Houses in accordance with the resolutions of such Houses. Sec. 104. The Speaker and Vice-Speaker of the Senate remain in office until the day preceding the day appointed for the election of a new Speaker and Vice-Speaker, which must be conducted on every occasion of the retirement of one-half the membership. The Speaker and Vice-Speaker of the House of Representatives remain in office throughout the duration of the House or until the House is dissolved. Before the termination of their terms of office as provided in the two preceding paragraphs the Speakers and Vice-Speakers of both Houses vacate their offices upon (1) (2) (3) (4) Becoming disqualified as member of their respective Houses; Resignation from their office; Being appointed Minister of State or to other political post; Being sentenced by a judgment of the Court to a term of imprisonment.

Sec. 105. It is the duty of the Speaker of either House to conduct its proceedings in accordance with its Rules of Procedure. The ViceSpeaker shall act in the place of the Speaker when the latter is absent or unable to perform his duties. -Sec. 106. Should both the Speaker and the Vice-Speaker be absent at any sitting of either House, the members shall elect one of their number to preside at that sitting. Sec. 107. At any sitting of either House the presence of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of such House is required to form a quorum. Sec. 108. Unless specially provided in this Constitution all questions shall be decided by a majority of votes. Each member has one vote. In case of a tie the presiding officer shall have a casting vote in addition to the vote to which he is entitled. Sec. 109. Words uttered by members at any sitting of either House or at any joint sitting of Parliament, whether in making a statement of facts or expressing an opinion, and votes cast by members are absolutely privileged, for which no action or charge may be brought against them in any manner whatsoever. This privilege extends to the printing and publication of the minutes of the sitting by authority of either House and to statements of fact and expressions of opinion made at the sitting by persons invited by either House to do so. Sec. 110. The sessions of both Houses begin and end at the same time, simultaneously with the session of Parliament. Sec. 111. The Senate may not sit during the dissolution of the House of Representatives. Sec. 112. Parliament shall hold one or more ordinary sessions every year in accordance with the decision to be taken by the House of Representatives. The first ordinary session must be called not later than thirty days after the election of members. The opening date of an ordinary session to be called yearly shall be fixed by the House of Representatives.

Sec. 113. An ordinary session shall last for ninety days, but the period may be extended by the King. The King may prorogue the session referred to in the foregoing paragraph. Sec. 114. The King convokes Parliament. He opens and closes the sessions of Parliament. At the opening of Parliament the King Himself may be present to perform the ceremony or may command the Heir to the Throne, if he is sui juris, or any other person to perform the ceremony in His place. Sec. 115. Whenever the interests of the State so require, the King may call an extraordinary session of Parliament. Sec. 116. Senators and members of the House of Representatives jointly or members of either House separately numbering no less than one-third of the total membership of both Houses are entitled to sign a petition to the King requesting Him to call an extraordinary session of Parliament. If the petition referred to in the foregoing paragraph is signed by members of either House separately, it shall be lodged with the Speaker of the respective Houses. A joint petition shall be lodged with the Speaker of Parliament. The Speaker with whom the petition is lodged shall submit it to the King and countersign the Royal Command. Sec. 117. The convocation, prolongation and prorogation of Parliament shall be commanded by Royal Decree. Sec. 118. No member of the Senate or the House of Representatives may, during the session, be placed under arrest or detention or summoned by a warrant to answer a criminal charge before an investigation unless the permission of the House of which he is member be obtained or he be arrested in flagrante delicto. The arrest of a member of either House in flagrante delicto shall be reported at once to the Speaker of the House of which he is a member and the Speaker may order his release from detention. Sec. 119. No criminal action brought against a member of either House, whether during the session or before the opening thereof, may be tried by the Court during the session unless the permission of the House of which he is a member be obtained. In any case, the proceedings of the Court must not interfere with his attendance at the sitting. The proceedings taken by the Court before the issuance of membership plea are valid. Sec. 120. If a member of either House was placed under detention pending a criminal investigation or trial before the opening of the session, the investigator or the Court, as the case may be, shall, at the opening of the session, order his instant release at the request of the House of which he is a member. Such order of release shall be effective from the day of release till the last day of the session. Sec. 121. A Bill may be initiated only by the Council of Ministers or a member of the House of Representatives. However, a money Bill initiated by a member of the House of Representatives must be endorsed by the President of the Council of Ministers. A money Bill means a Bill containing any or all of the following matters, namely the imposition, repeal, reduction, modification, remission of

taxes or duties or the issuance of enforceable regulations relating thereto, the appropriation, supply, maintenance or expenditure of State Funds, the contracting of loans, guarantee or redemption of loans and a Bill dealing with currency. In case of doubt, the power is vested in the Speaker of the House of Representatives to decide whether or not a Bill is a money Bill. Sec. 122. All Bills shall first be presented to the House of Representatives. After they are passed by the House of Representatives the Bills shall be presented to the Senate who shall complete their readings within a period of sixty days, with the exception of money Bills the reading of which must be completed by the Senate within a period of thirty days. However, such periods of time may be extended by resolution of the House of Representatives in special cases. The periods of time referred to in the foregoing paragraph mean the periods during session. They are counted from the day when the Bills reach the Senate in the course of transmission. If the readings of the Bills in the Senate are not completed within the periods referred to in the first paragraph, the Senate shall be deemed to have approved of the Bills. Sec. 123. If upon completing the readings of a Bill (1) The Senate approves of it without amendments, proceedings shall be
taken under Section 76; (2) The Senate disapproves of it, the passing of the Bill shall be withheld and the Bill shall be returned to the House of Representatives; (3) The Senate amends it, the amended Bill shall be returned to the House of Representatives. In this case each House shall appoint its own members or other persons in an equal number fixed by the House of Representatives to a Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall examine the Bill in question and return the Bill to both Houses with its report. If both Houses approve of the Bill as returned by the Joint Committee, proceedings shall be taken under Section 76. If the Bill as returned is disapproved by either House its passing shall be withheld. The Joint Committee shall have power to summon any person to appear before its meeting to examine the Bill and make statements of fact or expressions of opinion. The privilege provided in Section 109 shall be extended to persons summoned to appear under this section. In holding the examination of a Bill the presence of not less than onehalf of the total membership of the Joint Committee is required to form a quorum and the Rules of Procedure for the Senate governing committees shall apply by analogy. Sec. 124. A Bill, the passing of which is withheld under Section 123, may be re-examined by the House of Representatives after the lapse of one year counting from the day of its being returned to the House of Representatives by the Senate. In such a case, if the House of Representatives reaffirms the Bill in its original draft or approves of the Bill as returned by the Joint Committee with a majority vote of more than one-half the total membership of the House, it shall be deemed that Parliament has approved of the Bill and proceedings shall be taken under Section 76. If the Bill being withheld is a money Bill, the House of Representatives may forthwith proceed to re-examine it. In such a case, if the House of Representatives reaffirms the Bill in its original draft or approves of

the Bill as returned by the Joint Committee with a majority vote of more than one-half the total membership of the House, it shall be deemed that Parliament has approved of the Bill and proceedings shall be taken under Section 76. Sec. 125. All Bills left pending approval by Parliament as well as Bills disapproved by the King or not returned by the King within ninety days shall lapse at the expiry of the duration of the House of Representatives or upon the dissolution of the House. Sec. 126. The annual budget of the State shall be presented in the form of an Act. If the Act is not passed in time for the new year, the Budget Act of the preceding year shall remain in force for the time being. Sec. 127. Expenditure of State funds may be made only on items sanctioned by the law governing budget. However, in cases of urgency expenditure may be made, provided that it conforms to the rule and procedure laid down by law and ratification by Parliament be obtained on the first occasion. The ratification by Parliament may be made in the form of a special Act or included in an Act transferring budgetary funds, supplementary Budget Act or the Budget Act for the following year. Sec. 128. The power is vested in the Senate and the House of Representatives to supervise the administration of State affairs in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Sec. 129. At the sitting of either House every member is entitled to interpellate a Minister of State on all matters within the scope of his authority. However, if he considers that for reasons of public safety or in the vital interests of the State the matter should not be divulged, the Minister may withhold his answer. Sec. 130. Members of either House numbering not less than one-fifth of the total membership of the respective Houses may jointly sign a motion to open a general debate in their House so as to give the Council of Ministers an opportunity to state facts or express its opinion on any question involving the administration of State affairs. The motion referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be lodged with the Speaker of the House to which the members making the motion belong. The Speaker shall give notice of the motion to the President of the Council of Ministers and arrange for the general debate to take place not later than thirty days counting from the day of giving such notice to the President of the Council of Ministers. However, if the Council of Ministers considers that, for reasons of public safety or in the vital interests of the State, the matter should not be divulged, it is entitled to suppress the motion for general debate. In a general debate conducted under this section no resolution may be passed by the House on any question forming the subject matter of the debate. Sec. 131. Members of the House of Representatives numbering not less than one-third of the total membership of the House may jointly sign a motion to open a general debate to vote non-confidence in Ministers individually or collectively. If the general debate in the House of Representatives comes to an end without a resolution being passed to proceed to other business on the agenda, the Speaker of the House shall give notice thereof to the Speaker of the Senate. In such a case the Senate may open a general debate on

the same subject matters and forward its observations to the House of Representatives for consideration. The motion of non-confidence or confidence shall be put to vote by the House of Representatives only after notice of the debate in the Senate as provided in the preceding paragraph has been received. Sec. 132. If questions concerning the administration of State affairs arise in respect of which the Council of Ministers considers it advisable to hear the views of the members of both Houses, the President of the Council of Ministers will give notice to the Speaker of Parliament with the request that a general debate be opened in a joint sitting of Parliament. In such a case no resolution may be passed by Parliament on the subject matter of the debate. Sec. 133. The sittings of both Houses are open to the public subject to the Rules of Procedure of either House. However, either House may sit in camera at the request of the Council of Ministers or of not less than twenty-five of its members. Sec. 134. Either House may appoint its members to an ordinary committee. It may appoint its members or other persons to a special committee to inquire into any matter within the scope of its authority and report its findings to the House. The Committee so appointed may summon any person to appear before its meeting and to state facts or express opinions on the subject under inquiry. The, privilege provided in Section 109 shall be extended to persons summoned to appear under this Section. Sec. 135. At the meetings of the Committee the presence of not less than one-half of its total membership is required to form a quorum. Sec. 136. Either House shall have power to lay down Rules of Procedure for the purpose of regulating the presentation at its sitting of Bills and motions, the conduct of its proceedings and other matters, in pursuance of the provisions of this Constitution. Part 5 Joint Sitting of Parliament Sec. 137. Joint sitting of Parliament shall take place in the following cases: (1) Approval of the appointment of the Regent under Section 19 and Section 20; (2) The Regent's making a solemn declaration before the assembly of Parliament under Section 22; (3) Approval of succession to the Throne under Section 25; (4) Re-examination of a Bill under Section 77; (5) The opening of Parliament under Section 114; (6) The opening of a general debate under Section 132; (7) Giving consent to a declaration of war under Section 153; (8) Ratification of a treaty under Section 154; (9) Appointment of members to the Judicial Committee for the Constitution under Section 168; (10) Amendment of the Constitution under Section 173; (11) Interpretation of the Constitution under Section 177. Sec. 138. The Rules of Procedure for the Senate shall apply by analogy to joint sittings of Parliament.

Sec. 139. The provisions applicable to both Houses shall apply by analogy to joint sittings of Parliament.
CHAPTER VII THE EXECUTIVE POWER

Sec. 140. The King appoints the President of the Council of Ministers and not less than fifteen but not more than twenty-five other Ministers of State who shall thus form a Council of Ministers, charged with the duty of administering the affairs of State. The appointment of the President of the Council of Ministers by Royal Command shall be countersigned by the Speaker of Parliament. Sec. 141. Before taking office every Minister of the State must make a solemn declaration in the presence of the King in the following words: "I (naming the person making the solemn declaration) pledge my honor and loyalty to His Majesty King (naming the reigning Monarch) and my service to the country and to the people. I do solemnly declare that I will uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect." Sec. 142. No permanent Government official may serve as Minister of State. Sec. 143. The acts of disqualification for members of the Senate and the House of Representatives provided in Section 80 apply as well to Ministers of State. Moreover, no Minister of State may act as manager, director, adviser, agent or employee of any person, partnership, company. or corporation operating for profit. Sec. 144. Ministers of State who are not members of either House may attend and make statements of fact or expressions of opinion at its sitting or at a joint sitting of Parliament, but they are not entitled to vote. The privilege provided in Section 109 shall be extended by analogy. Sec. 145. In pursuing its policies for the administration of State affairs the Council of Ministers must have the confidence of the House of Representatives. A Minister of State who is put in charge of a Ministry shall be responsible to Parliament for the administration of such Ministry. All Ministers of State, with or without portfolio, are collectively responsible to Parliament for the conduct of general policies of the Council of Ministers. Sec. 146. In assuming office the Council of Ministers must state its policies before the House of Representatives and the Senate respectively. The vote of confidence or non-confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be taken by the House of Representatives only after the Council has stated its policies before the Senate. After the Council of Ministers has stated its policies before the Senate, the latter may forward its observations to the House of Representatives for consideration. Sec. 147. While the Council of Ministers is administering the affairs of State after having gained the confidence of the House of Representatives, if there arise any circumstances which, in the opinion of the Council of Ministers, call for the confirmation of such confidence by the House of Representatives, the provisions of Section 146 shall apply by analogy.

Sec. 148. The Council of Ministers collectively vacates its office upon: (1) The passing of a vote of non-confidence by the House of Representatives under Section 146 or Section 147; (2) The passing of a vote of non-confidence by the House of Representatives under Section 131; (3) The expiry of the duration or dissolution of the House of Representatives which passed the vote of confidence under Section 146; (4) Collective resignation; (5) The President of the Council of Ministers vacating his office under Section 149. The retiring Council must remain in office and carry on the administration until the appointment of a new Council of Ministers. Sec. 149. A Minister of State individually vacates his office upon: (1) Death; (2) Resignation; (3) Becoming disfranchised under Section 90 (1), (2), (3) or (5) or Section 93 (1), (2) or (3); (4) Being sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a judgment of the Court; (5) Becoming disqualified under Section 143; (6) Being the Minister against whom the House of Representatives has passed a vote of non-confidence under Section 131. Sec. 150. In a case of emergency when there is an urgent need to maintain public safety or to ward off a public calamity and Parliament cannot be summoned in time, or when such a case occurs during a dissolution of the House of Representatives, the King may issue an Emergency Decree which shall provisionally have the force of an Act. Such a Decree shall be presented to Parliament at its following session. If Parliament gives its ratification, the Decree shall become law. If Parliament withholds its ratification, the Decree shall lapse without prejudice, however, to any act done while it was still in force. The ratification and withholding thereof shall be done in the form of an Act. Sec. 151. While Parliament is in session, if it is necessary to pass a law dealing with taxes, duties or currency which in the interests of the State must receive an urgent and secret deliberation, the King may issue an Emergency Decree which shall provisionally have the force of an Act. The Decree issued under the foregoing paragraph shall be presented to Parliament within two days following its publication in the Government Gazette and the provisions of Section 150 paragraphs two and three shall apply by analogy. Sec. 152. The King may exercise His prerogative in declaring martial law in accordance with the circumstances and manner determined by the law governing the declaration of martial law. When necessary in case of emergency martial law may be declared locally by the military authorities in accordance with the law governing the declaration of martial law. Sec. 153. With the previous consent of Parliament the King may exercise His prerogative in declaring war. The resolution of Parliament giving consent to the declaration of war must be supported by a majority vote of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of both Houses.

Sec. 154. The King may exercise His prerogative in concluding Treaties of Peace or other treaties with foreign states. Treaties which provide for a change in the Thai territories or require the promulgation of an Act to make them enforceable must receive the approval of Parliament. Sec. 155. The King may exercise His prerogative in granting pardon. Sec. 156. The King may exercise His prerogative in withdrawing titles and reclaiming decorations. Sec. 157. The King may exercise His prerogative in issuing Royal Decrees which are not in conflict with law. Sec. 158. The King appoints and dismisses military and civil officials of the, rank of Under-Secretary and Director-General as well as other officials of equal rank. Seca 159. The qualifications, installation, appointment, dismissal and punishment of officials shall be determined by law. Sec. 160. Subject to the provisions of Sections 14, 18, 19, 82, 85, 116, 140 and 174 every law, Royal Rescript and Royal Command relating to the affairs of State shall be countersigned by a Minister of State.
CHAPTER VIII JUDICIAL POWER

Sec. 161. The judicial power is vested in the Courts exclusively and shall be exercised by the Courts in accordance with the law and in the name of the King. Sec. 162. Courts may be established only by an Act. Sec. 163. No new Court may be established to try any special case or action in lieu of the Courts established by law which have jurisdiction over such a case or action. Sec. 164. No law may be passed which changes or modifies the existing constitution of the Courts or law of procedure for the purpose of being applied to any special case. Sec. 165. The judges are independent in conducting trials and giving judgments in accordance with the law. Sec. 166. The King appoints, transfers and dismisses judges. Sec. 167. The appointment, transfer and dismissal of judges must be approved by the judicial committee appointed tinder the law governing judicial service before their submission to the King. The promotion of judges in rank and salary must receive the approval of the judicial committee appointed under the law governing judicial service.
CHAPTER IX THE JUDICIAL COMMITTEE FOR THE CONSTITUTION

Sec. 168. The Judicial Committee for the Constitution is composed of the Speaker of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Dika Court, the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal, the Director-General of the Department for Public Prosecution and four other persons appointed by Parliament out of persons who are qualified in the law. The Speaker of the Senate is the President of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution.

Sec. 169. The Judicial Committee for the Constitution is charged with the duties provided in this Constitution. The proceedings of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution shall be determined by the law relating thereto. Sec. 170. At every general election new members of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution shall be appointed by Parliament from quali fied persons within a period of thirty days from the opening of the first session. The period of time referred to in the foregoing paragraph means the period during session. In appointing new members to the Judicial Committee for the Constitution under paragraph one, Parliament may reappoint the outgoing members. Sec. 171. Members of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution who are appointed by Parliament vacate their office upon : (1) The opening of the first session of Parliament after a general election; (2) Death; (3) Resignation; (4) Becoming disfranchised under Section 90 (1), (2), (3) or (5) or Section 93 (1), (2) or (3); (5) Being sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a judgment of the Court. Sec. 172. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Judicial Committee for the Constitution for any reason other than retirement at the opening of the first session of Parliament after a general election, Parliament shall make a new appointment to fill the vacancy within a period of thirty days. The period of time referred to in the foregoing paragraph means the period during session.
CHAPTER X AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

Sec. 173. This Constitution may be amended only under the following conditions: (1) A motion for amendment is introduced by the Council of Ministers or by members of the Senate and of the House of Representatives jointly or members of either House numbering not less than one-fifth of the total membership of both Houses; (2) The motion for amendment is examined by Parliament in three readings; (3) At the first reading where votes are taken by roll call, the amendment is accepted in principle by a majority vote of not less than one-third of the total membership of both Houses; (4) At the second reading the amendment is passed section by section by a majority vote; (5) The third reading takes place after the lapse of fifteen days from the conclusion of the second reading; (6) At the third and last reading where votes are taken by roll call, the amendment to the Constitution is adopted by a majority vote of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of both Houses; (7) After the various resolutions have been passed in compliance with the foregoing conditions the amendment is submitted to the King and the provisions of Section 76 and Section 77 shall apply by analogy.

Sec. 174. If the King considers that the constitutional amendment submitted to Him under Section 173 operates to the prejudice of vital interests of the State or the people and that the people should be consulted, the King may exercise His prerogative in referring such a constitutional amendment to a plebiscite. In conducting the plebiscite the King shall have issued a Royal Decree within a period of ninety days from the date of the constitutional amendment being submitted to Him. A polling date will be fixed in the Royal Decree within ninety days and the polling shall take place on the same day throughout the Kingdom. The President of the Privy Council shall countersign the Royal Command. When the King exercises this prerogative under this section the provisions of Section 173 (7) shall not apply. Sec. 175. If the result of polling under Section 174 shows that the majority of the people decides in favor of the constitutional amendment, the King shall have signed the amendment within a period of thirty days counting from the day of publicly declaring the result of polling and the amendment shall become enforceable upon its publication in the Government Gazette. If the polling fails to show a majority in favor of the constitutional amendment, such an amendment shall lapse. Sec. 176. Persons entitled to vote in an election of members of the House of Representatives may cast their vote at a plebiscite. The rules and procedure for conducting a plebiscite shall be determined by the law relating thereto.
CHAPTER XI FINAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 177. Subject to the provisions of Section 179 the power to interpret the Constitution is vested in Parliament, so far as such a constitutional interpretation relates to matters within the scope of authority of the Senate, the House of Representatives, or both Houses sitting jointly. In such a case the interpretation by Parliament is final. In interpreting the Constitution under the foregoing paragraph the presence of not less than one-half the total membership of both Houses is required to form a quorum. Sec. 178. Any provisions of law which are contrary to or inconsistent with this Constitution are unenforceable. Sec. 179. If in applying the provisions of a law to any case the Court finds that such provisions come under Section 178, the Court shall stay its proceedings in such a case and refer its findings through the proper channel for decision by the Judicial Committee for the Constitution. The decision by the Judicial Committee for the Constitution shall be final and enforceable in all cases without prejudice to previous judgments of the Courts which have become final. The decision by the Judicial Committee for the Constitution shall be published in the Government Gazette.
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

Sec. 180. At the initial stage, if an appointment of the Regent is required in pursuance of this Constitution, the President of the Council of

Regency appointed under the Provisional Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand shall act as the Regent until the appointment of Regent is made under this Constitution. Sec. 181. Senators appointed under the Provisional Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand shall become senators under this Constitution and the duration of their membership in the Senate shall run from the date of their appointment by Royal Command. Sec. 182. Members of the House of Representatives elected under the Provisional Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand shall become members of the House of Representatives under this Constitution and the duration of the House shall run from the date of general election by which they were returned to Parliament. Before the members to be elected under Section 184 take their seats, the House of Representatives shall be composed of members referred to in the foregoing paragraph. Sec. 183. Within a period of thirty days from the date of enforcing this Constitution the provisions of Section 80 shall not apply to members of the Senate and of the House of Representatives. This exemption applies only to acts of disqualification done before the date of enforcing this Constitution. Sec. 184. Within a period of ninety days after the date of enforcing this Constitution additional members shall be returned by election to fill the seats in the House of Representatives provided in Section 87. Sec. 185. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution the election of additional members of the House of Representatives under Section 184 shall be governed by the Electoral Law B.E.2475 Amendment Act (No. 3) B.E.2479 and the Electoral Law Amendment Act B.E.2490, excepting the disqualifying Section 17 (1) of the Electoral Law B.E.2475 Amendment Act (No. 3) B.E.2479.' Should an election of members of the House of Representatives be held before the passing of an electoral law under this Constitution, the provisions of the foregoing paragraph shall apply. Sec. 186. The Council of Ministers appointed under the Provisional Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand shall provisionally remain in office and carry on the administration of State affairs in accordance with its policies as stated to Parliament until its retirement at the time when the new members of the House of Representatives to be elected under Section 184 take their seats. The provisions of Section 148 paragraph two shall apply. Sec. 187. Within a period of thirty days from the date of enforcing this Constitution, the provisions of Section 143 shall not apply to Ministers of State. This exemption applies only to acts of disqualification done before the date of enforcing this Constitution. Sec. 188. At the initial stage, Parliament shall appoint members to the Judicial Committee for the Constitution under Section 168 within a period of thirty days from the opening of its first session after the enforcing of this Constitution. The period of time referred to in the preceding paragraph means the period during session.

