LATIN AMERICAN PARLIAMENT Statute and Rules of Procedure

THAILAND Constitution

158

	

CONSTITUTIONAL AN!) PARLIAMENTARY INFORMATION

THAILAND

The Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand
(Promulgated, June 21, 1968)

CHAPTER 1
General Provisions.

Section 1.—Thailand is a Kingdom, one and indivisible. Section 2.—Thailand adopts a democratic form of government, having the King at its Head. Section 3.—The sovereign power emanates from the Thai people. The King, who is the Head of the State, exercises such power only in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution.

CHAPTER 2
The King.

Section 4.—The person of the King is in a sacred position and must not be violated. Section 5.—No person may prefer a charge or bring an action against the King in any manner whatever. Section 6.—The King is a Buddhist and the Upholder of religions. Section 7.—The King exercises the legislative power through the National Assembly.
Section 8.—The King exercises the executive power through the Council of Ministers.

Section 9.—The King exercises the judicial power through the Courts of Justice.

Section 10.—The King holds the position of Head of the Thai Armed Forces. Section 11.—The King has the prerogative to create titles and confer decorations. Section 12.—The King selects and appoints qualified persons to constitute a Privy Council composed of a President and not more than eight other Councillors. The Privy Council has the duty to advise the King on all matters pertaining to His functions as He may consult, and has such other duties as provided in this Constitution. Section 13.—The selection, appointment and retirement of a Privy Councillor shall be at the King's pleasure. The President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command appointing or retiring the President of the Privy Council, and the President of the Privy Council shall countersign the Royal Command appointing or retiring other Privy Councillors. Section 14—A Privy Councillor must not be a permanent government official, minister of State or any other political official, senator, member of the House of Representatives, member or officer of any political party; and must not express any active sympathy for any political party. Section 15.—Before taking office a Privy Councillor must make a solemn declaration before the King in the following words: d, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to the King and will faithfully perform my duties in the interests of the country and people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect.» Section 16.—A privy Councillor vacates office upon death, resignation, or by a Royal Command. Section 17—The appointment and removal of the officials of the Royal Household and of the Royal Chief Aide-de-camp shall be at the King's pleasure. Section 18.—Whenever the King is absent from the Kingdom or is unable for any reason whatever to exercise His functions, He shall appoint a person Regent with the approval of the National Assembly and the President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command. Section 19.—In the case where the King does not appoint a Regent u nder section 18 or is unable to appoint a Regent owing to His not being sui juris or any other reason whatever, the Privy Council shall submit the name of a person suitable to hold the office of Regent to the N ational Assembly for approval. Upon the approval of the National Ass embly the President of the National Assembly shall make an announ-

cement, in the name of the King, of the appointment of such pars as Regent. Section 20.—Pending the appointment of the Regent under section 1 or section 19, the President of the Privy Council shall temporari ly Regent. In the case where the Regent appointed under section 18 or section 19 is unable to perform his duties the President of the p • Council shall temporarily act as Regent. While being Regent under the first paragraph or acting as Regent under the second paragraph, the President of the Privy Council shall nut perform his duties as President of the Privy Council. In such case, the Privy Council shall select a Privy Councillor to act te mporarily as the President of the Privy Council. Section 21.—Before taking office the Regent appointed under sec. tion 18 or section 19 must take a solemn declaration before the National. Assembly in the following words: d, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to His Majesty King (mentioning the name of the reigning K ing) and will faithfully perform my duties in the interest of the country and people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect.» Section 22.—Succession to the Throne shall be in accordance with the Palace Law on Succession B.E. 2467, and must be approved by the National Assembly. The repeal or amendment of the Palace Law on Succession B.E.2467 may be made in the same manner as an amendment of the Constitution. Section 23.—In the case where the Throne becomes vacant, the Privy Council shall, in accordance with the Palace Law on Succession B.E. 2467, submit' the name of the Heir to the Throne to the National Assembly for approval. Upon the approval of the National Assembly, the President of the National Assembly shall invite such Heir to ascend the Throne and proclaim him King. Pending the proclamation of the name of the Heir to the Throne under the first paragraph, the President of the Privy Council shall temporarily be Regent. In the case where the Throne becomes vacant while a Regent has been appointed under section 18 or section 19 or while the President of the Privy Council. is acting as Regent under the first paragraph of section 20, such Regent, as the case may be, shall - continue to be Regent until the proclamation of the name of the Heir to. the Throne.	 In the case where the Regent who has been appointed and continues to be Regent under the second paragraph is unable to perform his duties, -the' President of the Privy Council shall act temporarily as Regent. In the case where the President of the Privy Council is Regent under the second paragraph or acts temporarily as Regent under, the

third paragraph, the provision of the third paragraph of section 2(1 shall 'apply. CHAPTER 3
Rights and Liberties of the Thai people.

Section 24.—All-persons, irrespective of birth or religion, are equally under the protection of the Constitution. Section 25.—All persons are equal before the law. Titles acquired by birth, bestowal or any other manner do not create any privilege whatever. Section 26.—Every person enjoys full liberty to profess any religion, any religious sect or religious creed, and to exercise a form of worship in accordance with his belief,, provided that it is not contrary to his civic duties or to public order or good morals. -In exercising the liberty referred to in the first paragraph, every person shall be protected from any act by the State, which is derogatory to his rights or detrimental to his due benefits, on the ground of professing a religion, a religious sect or religious creed, or of exercising a form of worship in . accordance with his belief different from those of others. Section 27.—No person shall be inflicted with a criminal punishment unless he has committed an act which the law in force at the time of its commission provides it to be an offence and imposes a punishment therefor, and the punishment to be inflicted on such person shall not be heavier than that provided by the law in force at the time of its commission. Section 28.—In a criminal case the alleged offender or the accused shall be presumed innocent. Before the passing of a final judment convicting a person of having co mmitted an offense, such person shall not be treated as a convict. An application for bail by the alleged offender or the accuser must be accepted for consideration and excessive bail shall not be demanded. The refusal of a bail must be based upon the grounds in accordance with the principles specifically provided by law, and the reason for s uch refusal must be notified to the alleged offender or the accused. Persons being detained or undergoing a term of imprisonment are e ntitled, within reason, to receive visitors. Section 29.—Every person enjoys full liberty of the person. No arrest, detention or search of person under any circumstances wh atever may be made except by virtue of law, and the person so ar rested or searched shall, without delay, be notified of the reason

of his arrest or search together with sufficient particulars. The perso so detained has the right to see and consult his counsel in privacy. In the case of detention of a person, such person or the Pubii Prosecutor or any other person acting in the interest of the perso so detained has the right to submit to the local Court having crimina jurisdiction a plaint alleging that the detention is unlawful. wher such plaint is submitted, the Court shall forthwith proceed with a/ ex parte investigation. If in the opinion of the Court the plaint present, a prima facie case, the Court has the power to order the person responBible for the detention to produce the person so detained promptly before the Court, and if the person responsible for the detention cannot show to the satisfaction of the Court that the detention is lawful, the Court shall order immediate release- of the person so detained. Section 30.—Forced labour may be imposed only by virtue of the law specifically enacted for the purpose of averting imminent public calamity or by virtue of the law which provides for its imposition during the time when the country is in ..state of armed conflict or war, or when a state of emergency or martial law is declared. Section 31.—Every person enjoys full liberty of the dwelling. Every person is protected in his peaceful habitation and possession of his dwelling. The entry into a person's dwelling without his consent or the search thereof may only be made by virtue of law. Section 32.—The right of a person in property is guaranteed. The extent and limitation of such right are governed by law. Succession is guaranteed.	 The right of a person in succession is governed by law. Expropriation of immovable property may only be effected by virtue of the law specifically enacted for the purpose of public utility, direct defence of the country, exploitation of national resources, or for the interest of town and country planning, or for other interests of the State; and just compensation must be paid to the owner thereof as well as to the person having the right to compensation specified in the law on expropriation of immovable property, who suffers loss by such expropriation. Section 33.—Every person enjoys full liberties of speech, writing, printing and publication. Restrictions on such liberties may only be imposed by virtue of the law specifically enacted for the purpose of safeguarding the liberties of other persons, avoiding a state of emergency, maintaining public order or good morals, or protecting young persons from moral degeneration. No grant of money or other property may be made by the State as subsidy to a private newspaper. Section 34.—Every person enjoys full liberty of education, provided that such education is not contrary to his civic duties under the law on education and the law on organization of educational establishments.

Section 35.—Every person enjoys full liberty to assemble peacefully and without arms. Restrictions on such liberty may only be imposed by virtue of law only in the case of public meetings, and for the purpose of ensuring conveniences for the public in the use of public places or of maintaining public order during the time when the country is in a state of armed conflict or War, or when a state of emergency or martial law is declared. Section 36.—Every person enjoys full liberty to form an association, provided that the object thereof is not contrary to the law. The formation and the management of an association are governed by law. Section 37.—Every person .enjoys full liberty to form a political party for the purpose of carrying out political activities through democratic means in so far as they are not contrary to the form of government under this Constitution. The formation and the management of a political party are governed by the law on political parties. Section 38.—Every person enjoys liberty of communication by post or by any other lawful means. Censorship, detention, or disclosure of letter, telegram, telephonic message or any other communication between persons may only be made by virtue of law. Every person has an equal right to employ all means of communication provided for public service. Section 39.—Every person enjoys. full liberty in the choice of his residence within the Kingdom and of his occupation. Restrictions on such liberty may only be imposed by virtue of the, law specifically enacted for the safety of the country, national economy or public welfare, or for the purpose of maintaining family relationship. 	 No person of Thai nationality shall. be deported from the Kingdom. Section 40.—Every person has the right, either by himself or in co njunction with others, to present a petition under the conditions and . in the manner provided by law. Section 41.—Family rights are guaranteed. Section 42.—The right of a person to sue a Government unit, which Is a juristic person, for the liability for an act done by its official, as principal or employer, is guaranteed. Section 43.—Members of the armed forces and the police force, other p ermanent government and local government officials, enjoy such rights and liberties as accorded to the people under the Constitution unless they are limited or restricted by law, bye-law or regulation

issued by virtue of law in so far at it concerns political activit efficiency or discipline. Section 44.—No person may exercise the rights and liberties un, this Constitution adversely to the nation, religion, King and Constitution

CHAPTER 4
Duties of the Thai people.

Section 45.—Every person has the duty to defend the country. •	 Section 46.—Every person has the duty to undergo the military service provided by law. Section 47.—Every person, has the duty to uphold the democratic form of government having the King as the Head under this Constitution. Section 48.—Every person has the duty to abide by the law. Section 49.—In the exercise of his right to vote in an election or in a referendum, a person has the duty to act in good faith and in consideration of the common interest. Section 50.—Every person has the duty to pay the taxes and duties imposed by law. Section 51.—Every person has the duty to assist the Government administration as provided by law. Section 52.—Every person has the duty to receive primary education under the conditions and in the manner provided by law.

CHAPTER 5
Directive Principles of State Policies.

Section 53.—The provisions in this Chapter are intended for the guidance of legislation and administration in accordance with defined policies and do not give rise to any cause of action against the State. Section 54.—The State shall safeguard the national independence. Section 55.—The State shall promote friendly international relations and adopt the principle of, reciprocity. Section 56.—The State shall co-operate with other nations in maintaining international justice and world peace. Section 57.—Armed forces are to be maintained in so far as

necessary for safeguarding the national independence, security and interests. Section 58.—The armed forces belong to the Nation, and may be employed in an armed conflict or a war, or in the suppression of a rebellion. The employment of armed forces for other purposes shall be governed by law. Section 59.—The State is to promote and advance education. The organization of educational system- is an exclusive duty of the State. All educational establishments are to be under the control and supervision of the State. As for higher education, the State is to enable educational establishments to manage their own affairs within the limits provided by raw. Section 60.—Primary education in State educational establishments must. be provided without charge. The State is to render assistance in furnishing adequate educational materials. Section 61.—The State is to encourage research in arts and sciences. Section 62.—The State is to conserve the national culture, but. compulsory measures must not be taken against the will of a person. Section 63.—The State is to maintain places and objects of historical, cultural and artistic value. Section 64.—The State is to encourage private economic. initiative. The .State is to take measures to co-ordinate the enterprises of public utility nature with private economic activities so as be benefit the people as a whole. The private enterprise of public utility nature or monopolistic e nterprise may be permitted only by virtue of law. Section 65.—The State is to promote and encourage agricultural Pursuits for the purpose of increasing produce both in quantity and

quality.

Section 66.—The State is to encourage private trade and production, both in agriculture and industry. Section 67,—The State is to promote and encourage social work for the welfare and happiness of the people. Section 68.—The State is to encourage people of working age to obtain employment appropriate for their station, and to ensure fair Prot ection of labour. Section 69.—The State is to promote public health.

Section 70.—The State is to promote local government and to sup. port local government bodies to be able to perform their function efficiently. CHAPTER 0
Legislative Power.

Part 1.
General Provisions.

Section 71.—The National Assembly consists of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Joint or . separate sittings of the National Assembly are governed by this Constitution. Section 72.—The President of the Senate is the President of the National Assembly. The President of the House of Representatives is the Vice-President of the National Assembly. The President of the National Assembly has the duty to conduct the proceedings of the National Assembly at joint sittings in accordance with its rules of procedure and has such other duties as provided in this Constitution. In the case where the President of the National Assembly is unable to perform his duties, the Vice-President of the National Assembly shall act in his place. Section 73.—A bill may only be enacted as law by and with the advice and consent of the National Assembly. Section 74.—After a bill has been passed by the National Assembly, the President of the Council of Ministers shall submit it to the King for His signature and it shall come into force upon its publication in the Government Gazette. Section 75.—If the King does not give assent to a bill and either returns or does not return it to the National Assembly within ninety days, the National Assembly must re-deliberate such bill. If the National Assembly, by a resolution, reaffirms the bill by the vote of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses, the President of the Council of Ministers shall 're-submit such bill to the King. If the King does not return the bill with His signature within thirty days, the President of the Council of Ministers shall cause such bill to be published as law in the Government Gazette as if the King had attached His signature thereto. Section 76.—No person may concurrently be . a senator and a member of the House of Representatives.

Section 77.—Either senators or members of the House of Representatives of not less than five , in number have the right to lodge a complaint with the President of the House of which they are members, asserting that membership of any member of the House has terminated under this Constitution. The President of the House with whom the complaint is lodged shall refer it to the Constitutional Tribunal for consideration and decision. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be deemed final and the Constitutional Tribunal shall inform the President of the House with whom the complaint has been lodged under the paragraph of its decision. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal to the effect that the membership of any member has terminated is not to affect the act performed by such member in the course of his duty before the President of the House of which- he is a member has been informed of such decision. Part 2. The Senate. Section 78.—The Senate is composed of members appointed by the King from persons possessing technical qualifications or qualifications in various fields which will benefit the administration of the country, being of Thai nationality by birth, and of not less than forty years of age. The number of senators shall be three-fourths of the total number of members of the House of Representatives. A fraction of the number so calculated, if any, shall be omitted.
Section 79.—The membership of a senator is for a term of six years from the date of his appointment by the King. For the initial term, one-half of the senators shall, at the expiry of three years from the date of the initial appointment by the King, retire by drawing lots, and the termination of membership -by drawing lots shall also be regarded as retirement- by rotation. 	 The King may exercise His prerogative to re-appoint the senators r etiring by rotation. Section 80.—The membership of a senator terminates upon: (1) retirement by rotation; (2) death;

(3) resignation;
(4) loss of Thai nationality; (5) disfranchisement under section 86 (1) (2) (3) or (5) or prohibition under section 89 (1) (2) or (3); (6) sentence of a term of imprisonment by a judgement of the Court, except for an offence committed through negligence, a petty offence or -n o ffense punishable b y the same penalty as a petty offence.

Section 81.--If there is a vacancy of membership in the Senate for any reason other than retirement by rotation, the King will appoint a person qualified under section 78 to fill the vacancy. The senator so appointed may hold office for the remaining term of office of the person he replaces. Part 3.
The House of Representatives.

Section 82.—The House of Representatives is composed of members elected by the people, the number of which will be on the basis provided in section 83. The election of members of the House of Representatives shall be by direct suffrage and secret ballot, and the boundary of .Changwat shall be considered the basis thereof. The election, whether by the method of representation through single-member or multi-member constituency, shall be governed by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives... Section 83.—The number of the members of the House of Representatives to be elected shall be determined by the number of the population in each Changwat as evidenced in the census announced in the year preceding the election year at the ratio of one hundred and fifty thousand persons to one member. A. Changwat with the population less than one hundred and fifty thousand shall elect one member, while a Changwat with the population exceeding one hundred and fifty thousand shall elect .an additional member for every one hundred and fifty thousand population; any fraction thereof, if amounting to seventyfive thousand or more, shall he counted as one hundred and fifty thousand. Section 84.—A person who is qualified under section 85 and is not disfranchised under section 86 has the right to vote in an. election. Section 85.—A person who is entitled to vote in an election must possess the following qualifications: (1) being of Thai nationality under the law, provided that a person of Thai nationality whose father is an alien or a naturalized Thai must, in addition, possess other qualifications stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives; (2) being of not less than twenty years of age on the first day of January, of the election year; (3) possessing other qualifications as may be stipulated by, the law on election of members of the House of Representatives. Section 86.—A person under any of the following disabilities on the election day is disfranchised: (1) being of unsound mind or of mental infirmity;

(2) being deaf and dumb and incapable of reading and writing; (3) being a Buddhist priest or novice, monk or. clergy; (4) being under detention by .a warrant of the Court; (5) being revoked of his right to vote in an election by a judgment of the court. Section person having the right to vote in an election under section 84 and being qualified under section 88 who is not prohibited under section 89 is entitled to stand as a candidate for membership of .the House of Representatives.. However, the provision of section 86 (4) shall not apply in the case where a person under detention has not yet been sentenced to a term of imprisonment by a judgment of the Court. Section 88.—A candidate in an election must possess the following • qualifications: (1) being of Thai nationality under the law, provided that a person of Thai nationality whose father is an alien or a naturalized Thai must, in addition, possess other qualifications stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives; (2) being of not less than thirty years of age on the election day; (3) having education of the standard stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives; (4) possessing other qualifications as may be stipulated by the law on election of members of the House of Representatives. Section 89.—A person under any of the following disabilities is prohibited to stand as a candidate in an election:-(1) being addicted to a harmful drug; (2) being totally blind; (3) being an undischarged brankrupt; (4) having been sentenced by a judgment of the Court to a term of i mprisonment of two years or upwards and the period of five years from the date of his discharge to the election day has not yet elapsed except for an offence committed through negligence; (5) being a government or local government official receiving a 'salary and holding a permanent position, except a political official; (6) other disabilities as may be stipulated by the law on election f members of the House of Representatives. Section 90.--Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the ',Iles and procedure of election shall be governed by the law on election of members of 'the House of Representatives. Section 91.--The term of the House of Representatives is four years from the opening day of the first sitting of the National Assembly. Section 92.—The election of members of the House of mvaRyebphrtldsfniuoaRylDecrfntio

of members of the House of Representatives. Such Royal Decree shall specify the period in which the applications of the candidates will be accepted, as well as the election day. In case of a general election, the same day shall be appointed election day throughout the Kingdom. Section 93.—The King has the prerogative to dissolve the House of Representatives in order that new members may be elected by the people. The dissolution of the House of Representatives shall be by a Royal Decree in which a date must be appointed for a general election to be held within ninety days. Section 94.—Membership of the House of Representatives co mmences from the opening day of the first sitting of the National Assembly, Section 95. — Membership of the House of Representatives terminates upon; (1) the expiry of the term of the House of Representatives or the dissolution of the House of Representatives; (2) death; (3) resignation; (4) disqualification under section 85 or section 88; (5) disfranchisement under section 86 (1) (2) (3) or (5) or prohibition under section 89 (1) (2) (3) (5) or (6); (6) sentence . of a term of imprisonment by a. judgment of the Court, except for an offence committed through negligence, a petty offence, or an offence punishable by the same penalty as a petty offence. Section 96.—If there is a vacancy of membership for any reason other than the expiry of the term of the House of Representatives or dissolution of the House of Representatives, a new member shall be elected to fill the vacancy in a bye-election within ninety days, unless the remainder of the term of the House of Representatives is less than one hundred and eighty days. Membership of the replacing member commences from the day he assumes his duties and. he may hold office only for the remainder of the .term of the House. Part 4. Provisions Applicable to Both Houses. Section 97.—Senators and members of the House of Representatives are representatives of the Thai people. They are not bound by any imperative mandate and must perform their duties in accordance with the honest dictates of their conscience for the common interest of the Thai people. Section 98.—Before taking office the senators and the members

of-the House of Representatives must make a solemn declaration in the assembly of their respective House in the following words:— I, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will perform my duties in accordance with the honest dictates of my conscience for the common interest of the Thai people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect. Section 99.—The Senate and the House of Representatives shall each have a President and one or two Vice-Presidents who are appointed by the King from the members of the respective House in accordance with the resolution of such House. Section 100.—The President and the Vice-President of the Senate hold office until the day preceding the date of election of a new President and Vice-President, which must be held on every occasion of the retirement of one half of the total number of its members. The President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives hold office until the expiry of the term of the House or the dissolution of the House. Before the termination of their term of office under the first and second paragraphs, the President and the Vice-President of the Senate and the President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives vacate office upon: (1) loss of membership in the House of which they are members; (2) resignation from their office. Section 101.—The President of the Senate and the President of the House of Representatives have the duty to conduct the proceedings of their respective House in accordance with the respective rules of procedure.. The Vice-President has the duty to act in the place of the President when the President is unable to perform his duties.
Section 102.—If the President and the Vice-President of the Senate or the President and the Vice-President of the House of Representatives are absent from any sitting, the members of such House shall elect one from themselves to preside over that sitting. Section 103.—At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of Reprentatives, the presence of members of not less than one-third of the total number of members of such House shall constitute a quorum. Section 104.—Subject to section 75, section 121, section 149 and section 169, all questions shall be decided by a majority of votes. E ach member has one vote. In case of an equality of votes the P re siding member shall have an additional vote as a casting vote. Section 105.—At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of Repretatives or of the National Assembly, any word uttered in making a stat ement of fact, opinion expressed, or vote tasted, by any member,
sen

se

is absolutely privileged. No charge, or action in any manner whatever may he preferred or brought against such member. This privilege extends to the printer and publisher of the minutes of the sitting by order of either House and also to persons permitted by the presiding member to make any statement of fact or to express any opinion at its sitting. Section 106.—The session of the Senate and that of the House of Representatives begin and end at the same time as that of the National Assembly. Section 107.—The Senate may not sit (luring a dissolution of the House of Representatives. Section 108.—There shall be one or more ordinary sessions of the National Assembly each year as may be determined by the House of Representatives. The first sitting must be convened within thirty days from the election day. The first day of an ordinary annual session shall be determined by the House of Representatives. Section 109.—An ordinary session shall last ninety days, but the King may prolong its duration. During the period referred to in the first paragraph, the King may prorogue the session. Section 110.—The King convokes the National Assembly. He opens and closes its sessions. The King may be present to perform the opening ceremony of the session or may command the Heir to the Throne who is sui juris or any other person to perform the ceremony as His representative. Section 111.—When it is necessary for the interest of the State, the King may convoke the National Assembly to an extra-ordinary session. Section 112.—Senators and members of the House of Representatives jointly, or members of either House, of not less than one-third of the total number of members of both Houses, have the right• to have their petition submitted to the King in order that a Royal Command may be issued to convoke the National Assembly to an extra-ordinary session. If the petition referred to in the first paragraph is of the members of both Houses, it shall be lodged with. the President of the National Assembly; if of the members of either House, it shall be lodged with the President of their respective. House. The President of the House who receives the petition shall submit it to the King and countersign the Royal Command. Section 113.—Subject to section 112, the convocation, prolonga-

tion and prorogation of the National Assembly shall be effected by a Royal Decree. Section 114.—No senator or member of the House of Representatives may during a session be placed under arrest or detention, or be summoned by a warrant for inquiry on a criminal charge, unless permission of the House of which he is a member is obtained, or he is arrested in flagrante delicto. The arrest of a senator or a member of the House of Representatives in flagrante delicto shall be forthwith reported to the President of the House of which- he is a member, and the President of the House of which he is a member may order the release of such arrested person from detention. Section 115.—In the case where a criminal action is brought against a senator or a member of the House of Representatives, whether the House is in session or not, the Court may not proceed with the case during the session unless the permission of the House of which he is a member is obtained. In any case, the proceedings of the Court must not interfere with the attendance of such member at the sittings of the House. The proceedings of the Court before the invocation of membership of the accused in either House are valid. Section 116.—If a senator or a member of the House of Representatives. is placed under detention pending a criminal inquiry or trial before the beginning of a session, the inquiry official or the Court, as the case may be, shall, at the beginning of the session, order his immediate release, if so requested by the House of which he is a member. The order of release, under the first paragraph shall be effective from the date of such order to the last day of the session. Section 117.—Bills can only be initiated by the Council of Ministers, senators, or members of the House of Representatives. No money bills may, however, be initiated by senators or members of the House of Representatives unless endorsed by .the President of the Council of Ministers. A money bill means a bill dealing with all or any of the gmfoatlers,nwyihporeal,ductin o mo dification, remission, or regulation of taxes or duties; the approp riation, receipt, custody or expenditure of State funds; or the raising, gu arantee or redemption of loans; or a bill dealing with currency. In case of doubt as to whether or not a bill is a money bill, the President of the House which has received the bill from the Council of Ministers, senators or members of the House of Representatives is. the case may be, shall have the power to make a decision thereon. Section 118.—Bills initiated by the Council of Ministers and hose by members of the House of Representatives shall be submitted

to the House of Representatives. Bills initiated by senators shall be submitted to the Senate. Section 119.--When the House of Representatives or the Senate has considered the bills submitted under section 118 and passed them, the House of Representatives or the Senate shall submit the bills to the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, The.Senate or the House of Representatives shall complete their consideration within sixty days, but where such bills are money bills, the Consideration of which must be completed within thirty days. Howe. ver, in' special cases, the House of Representatives or the Senate; which submits the bills, may, by resolution, extend the above periods. The said periods mean the periods (luring sessions, counting from theday the bills reach the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be. If the consideration of the bills in the Senate or the House of Representatives is not completed within -the periods referred to in the first paragraph, the Senate or the House of Representatives shall be deemed to have approved such bills. In the submission of the bills by the House of Representatives to the Senate or by the Senate to the House of Representatives under the first paragraph, the President of the House which submits the bills to the other House, shall give notice of his opinion as to whether or not the bills so submitted are money hills. The notice of the President of the House shall be deemed final. In the case where the President of the House fails to give notice as to whether or not a bill is a mone y bill, such bill shall be deemed not a money bill. Section 120.—After the Senate or the House of Representatives has completed its consideration of a bill, (1) if it agrees with the House of Representatives or the Senate, which has submitted the bill, proceedings shall be, taken under disagrees with the House-of Representatives or the Senate,' which has submitted the bill, in the case where such bill is submitted by the House of Representatives it shall be witheld and ' returned to the House of Representatives, in the case where such bill is submitted by the Senate it shall lapse; (3) if the bill is amended, the amended bill shall be returned to the House of Representatives or the Senate, which has submitted , the bill, as the case may be; in such case each House shall appoint its own members or other persons, at an equal number ,fixed by the Senate or the -House of. Representatives, which has submitted the bill, to form a Joint Committee for the consideration of the bill, which Joint Committee shall consider and return the bill with its report to both Houses; if both Houses approve the bill considered by the Joint Committee, proceeding shall be taken under section
section 74; (2) if it

either House disapproves the bill, such bill shall be withheld; in the case where such bill of the Senate, it shall lapse. In the consideration of a bill, the Joint Committee has the power to summon any person to make any statement of fact or to express opinion; and the privilege provided in section 105 shall also be extended to the person performing his duties under this section. At a meeting of the Joint Committee, the presence of members . of not less than one half of the total number of its members shall constitute a quorum and the rules of procedure of the Senate governing its committees shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 121.—A bill withheld under section 120 may be reconsidered by the House of Representatives after the lapse of one year from the date of its being returned by the Senate to the House of Representatives. In such case, if the House of Representatives reaffirms the bill in its original draft, or approves the bill considered by the Joint Committee, by the votes of more than one half of the total number of members of the House, such bill shall be deemed to have been approved by the National Assembly, and proceedings shall be taken under section 74. If the bill withheld is a money bill, the House of Representatives. may forthwith proceed to reconsider it. In such case, if the House of Representatives reaffirms the bill in its original draft, or approves it as considered by the Joint Committee, by the votes of more than one half of the total number of members of the House, such bill shall be deemed to have been approved by the National Assembly, and proceedings shall be taken under section 74. Section 122.—Upon the expiry of the House of Representatives term or the dissolution of the House of Representatives, all bills left pending approval of the National Assembly or not given assent to by the King or not returned by the King within ninety days shall lapse. Section 123.--The annual budget of the State shall be made in the form of an Act. If the Act is not passed in time for the following year, the budget Act of the preceding year shall apply for the time being. Section 124.—Expenditure of State funds may be made only as sanctioned by the law on-budget. However, in case of urgent necessity, expenditure may he made in advance, provided that the rules and procedure provided by law are complied with. In such case approval oftheNainlAsmbyuterqdfoahistpruny.
Approval of the National Assembly shall be made in the form of

s pecific Act or incorporated in an Act transferring budgetary un ds, a supplementary budget Act, or in the following annual budget Act. Section 125.—The Senate and the House of Representatives are,

- by virtue of this Constitution, vested with the power of supervising the administration of State affairs. Section 126.—At a sitting of the Senate or of the House of Repre sentatives, every member has the right to interpellate a minister of State on all matters within the scope of his authority. But the minister of State has the right to refuse to answer if he is of opinion that the matter should not yet be made public for the reason or public safety or of vital interest of the State. Section 127.—Senators or members of the House of Rep resentatives of not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of each House have the right to submit a motion for a general debate in the sitting of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, in order that the Council of Ministers may state the fact or express opinion on any question relating to the administration of State affairs.	 The motion referred to in the first paragraph of members of either House shall be submitted to the President of such. House, and the President of the House who receives the motion shall give notice thereof to the President of the Council of Ministers, in order that a date for the general debate may be appointed, which must not be later than thirty days from the day the President of the Council of Ministers has been notified. However, the Council of Ministers has the right to request such general debate to be withheld if, in its opinion, the matter should not yet be made public for the reason of public safety or of vital interest of the State. In a general debate conducted under this section, no resolution may be passed by the House on the subject matter of the debate.. Section 128.—Senators and members of the House of Representatives jointly, or members of either House, of not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of both Houses, have the right to submit a motion for a general debate for the purpose of passing a vote of no-confidence in the individual minister of State or in the Council of Ministers. If the motion referred to in the first paragraph is of the members of both Houses, it shall be submitted to the President of the National Assembly; if of the members of either House, it shall be submitted to the President of such House. The general debate on the motion referred to in the first paragraph shall be held at the sitting of the National Assembly. When the general debate comes to an end other than by the adoption of a resolution to pass over the general debate, the National Assembly shall take a vote of confidence or of no-confidence. Voting in' such 'case shall not take place on the same day as that of the conclusion of the debate. Section 129.—If there arises any question concerning State affairs, on which the Council of Ministers considers it . advisable to obtain

the opinions of senators and of members of the House of Representatives, the President of the. Council of Ministers may give notice to the President of the National Assembly requesting that a general debate be held at a sitting of the National Assembly. In such case, no resolution may be passed by the National Assembly on the subject matter of the debate. Section 130.—The sittings of the Senate and of the House of Representatives are public under the conditions stipulated in the rules of procedure of either House.' A sitting in camera, mais be held at the request of the Council of Ministers or of not less than twentyfive members of either House. Section 131.—The Senate and the House of Representatives have he power to select and appoint their respective members to form a tanding committee and have the power to select and appoint their espective members or other persons to form an ad hoc committee, in rder to act or inquire into any matter within the scope of work of the espective House and to report thereto. Such committee is empowered summon any person to make statement of fact or express opinion on le work or matter under its consideration. Privileges provided in section 105 shall be extended to persons 3rforming their duties under this section. Section 132.—At a meeting of the committee, the presence of embers of .not less than one-half of the total number of its members all constitute a quorum.. Section 133.—The Senate and the House of Representatives have power to lay down their respective rules of procedure on the preitation of bills, proposal of motions, conduct of their meetings, deli, -ation, and other matters in pursuance of the provisions of this constitution. Part 5. Joint Sittings of the National Assembly. Section 134.—The National Assembly shall hold a joint sitting in f ollowing cases: (1) the approval of the appointment of the Regent under section 18 section 19; (2) the making of solemn declaration by the Regent before the final Assembly under section 21; 3) the approval of the succession to the Throne under section 23; 4) the re-deliberation of bills under section 75; 5) the opening of the session of the National Assembly under J r1 110; ∎ ) the general debate under section 128 and section 129;

5

(7) the statement of policies under section 141; (8) the giving of consent to a declaration of war under section 149; (9) the ratification of treaties under section 150; (10) the appointment of members of the Constitutional Tribunal under section 164; (11) the amendment of the Constitution under section 169; (12) the interpretation of the Constitution under section 173; (13) the resolutions for the King's exercise of the legislative power through the Council of Ministers and for the termination of such exercise under the first paragraph of section 176. Section 135.—The rules of procedure of the Senate shall apply
mutatis mutandis to the sitting of the National Assembly.

Section 136.-Subject to the second paragraph of section 173, the provisions applicable to both Houses shall apply mutatis mutandis to the sitting Of the National Assembly.

CHAPTER 7
Executive Power.

Section 137.—The King appoints the President of the Council of Ministers and not less than fifteen but not more than thirty other ministers of State who shall form a Council -of Ministers having the functions to administer the State affairs. The President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command appointing the President of the Council of Ministers. Section 138.—Before taking office every minister of State must make a solemn declaration before the King in the following words: al, (name of the declarer), do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to the King and will faithfully perform my duties in the interests of the country and of the people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every. respect.) Section 139.—A minister of State may not concurrently be a senator or a member of . the House of Representatives. Section 140.—A minister of State may attend and make statement of fact or express opinion at the sitting of the Senate, the House of Representatives, or the National Assembly, but is not entitled to vote. The provision relating to privileges in section 105 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Section 141.—Before administering the State affairs, the Council of

Ministers must state its policies before the National Assembly. No voting as to confidence shall take place.

Section 142.—In administering the State affairs, the President of the Council of Ministers and the ministers of State assigned to be in charge of the ministries must be answerable to the National Assembly for their functions. All ministers of State must collectively be answerable to the. National Assembly for the general policy of the Council of Ministers. Section 143.—The Council of Ministers vacates office upon: (1) the passing of a vote of no-confidence by the National Assembly under section 128; (2) the expiry of the term of the House of Representatives or the dissolution of the House of-Representatives; (3) the resignation of the Council of Ministers; (4) the termination of ministership of the President of the Council of Ministers under section 144. The retiring Council of Ministers must remain in office to carry on the administration until a new Council of Ministers is appointed. Section 144.-•--The ministership of a minister of State terminates upon: (1) death; (2) resignation; (3) disqualification under section 88, or disfranchisement under section 86 (1) (2) (3) or (5), or prohibition under section 89 (1) (2) or (3); (4) the passing of a vote of no-confidence by the National Assembly under section 128; (5), the issue of the Royal Command under section 145. Section -145.—The King has the prerogative to relieve a minister of State of his office upon the advice of the President of the Council of . Ministers. Section 146.—In case of emergency when there is an urgent necsityomapublfetyroav iclmtyndhe

r ational Assembly cannot be convened in time, or when such case
occurs during a dissolution of the House of Representatives, the King may issue an Emergency Decree which shall have the force of an Act. At the following sitting of the National Assembly such Emergency )Decree shall be submitted thereto without delay. If the National Assembly approves such Emergency Decree, it shall continue to have force of an Act. If the National Assembly disapproves such EmergncyD,itshalpebuworjdictanyoeurg le enforcement of such Emergency Decree. The approval or disapproval thereof shall be made in the form of a Act.	 Section 147.---If, during a session, there is a necessity to enact law dealing with taxes, duties or currency, which, in the interest of e State, requires an urgent and confidential consideration, the King ay issue an Emergency Decree, which shall have the force of an Act.

The Emergency Decree issued under the first paragraph must be submitted to the National Assembly within two days following the date of its publication in the Government Gazette and the provisions of the second and third paragraphs of section 146 shall apply mutatis mutandis, Section 148.—The King has the prerogative to declare martial law in accordance .with the conditions and manner under the law on martial law. In the case where there is a necessity to make an urgent declaration of martial law in a certain locality, the military authorities may do so under the law on martial law. Section 149.—The King has the prerogative to declare war upon the consent of the National Assembly. The resolution of the National Assembly giving such consent must be carried by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses. Section 150.—The King has the prerogative to conclude peace treaties and other treaties with foreign States. Any treaty which provides for a change in the Thai territories or requires the enactment of an Act for its implementation must receive the approval of the National Assembly. Section 151.—The King has the prerogative to grant pardon. Section 152.—The King has the prerogative to divest of titles and recall decorations. Section 153.—The King has the prerogative to issue a Royal Decree which is not in conflict with the law. Section 154.—The King appoints and removes officials of military and civil services of the positions of Under-Secretary of State, DirectorGeneral, and the equivalents therof. Section 155.—The determination of qualifications, instatement, appointment, removal and punishment of officials shall be in accordance with the provisions of the law. Section 156.—Subject to section 13, section 13, section 112, section 137, and the second paragraph of section 170, every law, Royal Rescript, and Royal Command, relating to the State ,affairs must be countersigned by a minister of State.

CHAPTER 8
Judicial Power.

Section 157.—The trial and adjudication of case is an exclusive power of the Courts, which must be in accordance with the law and in the name of the King. Section 158.—All Courts are established only by Acts. Section 159.—No Court may be established to try and adjudicate any particular case, or a case of any particular accusation, in place-of the ordinary Court existing under the law and having jurisdiction over such case. Section 160.—No law may be enacted to have the effect of changing or amending the law on organization of the Courts, or the law 'on judicial procedure, for the purpose of applying to any particular case. Section adjudication 161.—A judge is independent in the trial and 	 of the case in accordance with the law. 	
Section 162.--The King appoints, transfers and removes judges. Section 163.—The appointment, transfer and removal of judges -must first be approved by the .judicial Committee in accordance with the law on judicial service before being submitted to the King. The promotion of position and raise of salary of judges must be approved by the Judicial Committee in accordance with the law on judicial service..

CHAPTER 9 The Constitutional Tribunal. Section 164.—The Constitutional Tribunal is composed of the President of the Senate, the President of the House of Representatives, the Pr esident of the Supreme Court, the (Thief Justice of the Court of Ap peal, the Director-General of the Public Prosecution Department, and four other persons appointed by the National Assembly from persons Pos sessing legal qualifications. The President of the Senate is the President of the Constitutional Tribunal. Section 165.—The constitutional Tribunal is charged with the duties provided in this Constitution. The rules of procedure of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be gov erned by the law relating thereto.

Section 166.—After a general election the National Assembly shall appoint new members of the Constitutional Tribunal from qualified persons within thirty days from the opening day of the first session of the National Assembly. The period referred to in the first paragraph shall mean the days during session. In the appointment of members of the Constitutional Tribunal under the first paragraph, the National Assembly may reappoint the retiring persons members of the Constitutional Tribunal. Section 167.—A member of the Constitutional Tribunal appointed by the National Assembly vacates office upon: (1) the opening of the first session of the National Assembly after a general election; (2) death; resignation; (3) (4) disqualification under section 88, or disfranchisement under section 86 (1) (2) (3) or (5), or prohibition under section 89 (1) (2) .or (3). Section 168.—If there is a vacancy of membership among the members of the Constitutional Tribunal appointed by the National Assembly by any reason other than that under section 167 (1), the National Assembly shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy within thirty days. The period referred to in the first paragraph shall mean the days during session. CHAPTER 10
Amendment of the Constitution.

Section 169.—An amendment of the Constitution may be made only under the following rules and .procedure; (1) the motion for amendment must either be proposed by the Council of Ministers, or jointly by senators and members of the House of Representatives; or members of either House, of not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of both Houses; (2) the motion for amendment must be proposed in the form of a draft Amendment of the Constitution, and the National Assembly shall consider it in three readings; (3) in the first reading, the voting for acceptance of the amendment in principle shall be by roll call and must be carried by not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses; (4) in the second reading, the voting in the consideration of the draft Amendment of the Constitution section by section shall be carried by a simple majority of votes; (5) at the conclusion of the second reading, there shall be an intervening period of fifteen days, after which the National Assembly shall proceed with its third reading;

(6) in the third and last reading, the voting shall be by roll call and the draft Amendment of the Constitution must be adopted by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of both Houses; -(7) After the resolution has been passed in accordance with the above rules and procedure, the draft Amendment of the Constitution shall be submitted to the King and the provisions of section 74 and section 75 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 170.—If the King considers that the draft Amendment of the Constitution submitted to Him under section 169 affects a vital interest of the State or the people, and deems expedient to have it decided by the people, He may exercise His prerogative to refer it to the people throughout the country to vote in a referendum for the approval or disapproval thereof. In case of a referendum there will be the proclamation of a Royal Command within ninety days from the day the draft Amendment of the Constitution has been submitted to Him, and the President of the National Assembly shall countersign the Royal Command. After the proclamation of the Royal Command under the second
paragraph, a Royal Decree shall be issued appointing the day for the referendum to be held within ninety (lays from the date of the proclamation of the Royal Command, and the day for the referendum must be the same throughout the Kingdom. When the King exercises His prerogative under this . section, the provision of section 109 (7) shall not apply. Section 171.:—A person having the right to vote in an election of members of the House of Representatives has the right to vote in a referendum. The rules and procedure of a referendum shall be governed by the law relating thereto. Section 172.—The referendum under section 170 shall be decided by a simple majority of votes. If the draft Amendment of the Constitution is approved in the referendum, the King will attach His signature thereto within thirty days from the date of the announcement of the result of the referendum; and the Amendment of the Constitution shall come into force upon its publication in the Government Gazette. If the draft Amendment of the Constitution is disapproved in a referendum, it shall lapse.

CHAPTER 11
Final Provisions.

Section 173.--Subject to section 175, if a question arises as to the i nterpretation of the Constitution in so far as it relates to matters within the scope of work of the Senate, the House of Representatives.

or the sitting of the National Assembly, the National Assembly shall have the power of interpretation and its interpretation shall be deemed final. In interpreting the Constitution under the first paragraph, the presence of members of not less than one-half of the total number of members of both Houses shall constitute a quorum. 'Section 174.—Any provision Of law containing matter inconsistent with or contrary to this Constitution is unenforceable. Section 175.—If, in applying any provision of law to any case, the Court is of opinion that such provision comes under section 174, it shall stay its trial and adjudication of the case and shall communicate its opinion through proper channel to the Constitutional Tribunal for decision. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be deemed final and shall be applicable to all cases, but without prejudice to the judgments of the Courts which have become final. The decision of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be published in the Government Gazette. Section 176.—During a state of war, or of an emergency of. such extent that may jeopardize the security of the Kingdom and when the normal exercise of the legislative power through the National Assembly may be impeded or unsuitable for the situation, the National Assembly may, upon the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, resolve that the legislative power be exercised by the King through the Council of Ministers by means of proclaiming a Royal Command which shall have the force of an Act. The National Assembly may at any time resolve to cancel the said resolution.	 If the state of war or of an emergency referred to in the first paragraph occurs or exists during the dissolution of the House of Representatives, or when the National Assembly cannot be convened in time, the King rimy exercise the legislative power through the Council of Ministers by means of proclaiming a Royal Command which shall have the force of an Act.

Transitory Provisions.

Section 177.—Within fifteen days from the date of enforcement of this Constitution, the King will appoint one hundred and twenty senators. After the election of members of the House of Representatives, the number of the senators shall be increased or reduced to such number as provided in section 78. The increase or reduction of the number of the senators under the first paragraph shall be completed before the opening day of the first sitting of the National Assembly. In case of an increase the King will

make the additional appointment; in case of a reduction, senators in a number equal to the reduction shall retire by drawing lots. Section 178.—At the initial stage before the opening of the first sitting of the National . Assembly following the election of members of the House of Representatives under section 180, the Senate shall have the powers and duties of the National Assembly. Section 179.—The convocation of the Senate to function as the National Assembly under section 178 shall be effected by a Royal Decree convoking the National Assembly within fifteen days from the date of the appointment of senators. Section 180.—The election of members of the House of Representatives on the basis under section 83 shall be completed within two hundred and forty days from the date of the enforcement of this Constitution. Section 181.—The Council of Ministers administering the State affairs on the date of the promulgation of this Constitution, or a. new Council of Ministers if formed afterwards, shall be the Council of Ministers administering the State affairs under this Constitution. Upon the assumption of. duties by members of the House of Representatives, the Council of Ministers under the first paragraph shall vacate office, and the provision of the second paragraph of section 143 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Section 182.—While the Senate functions as the National Assembly under section 178, the Constitutional Tribunal shall be. composed of the President of the Senate, the President of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal, the Director-General of the Public P rosecution Department and three other persons whom the Senate, f unctioning as the National Assembly under section 178, appoints from persons possessing legal qualifications within thirty days from the opening day of the sitting of the National Assembly under section 179. Section 183.—All. orders given by the President of the Council of M inisters under section 17 of the Constitution of the Kingdom shall r emain in force. Countersigned by Tawee Bunyaketu President of the Constituent Assembly

(Tr anslated from the Government Gazette. Volume 85. Special Issue, 20th June B.E. 2511 A.D. 1968).

