Law 60-10 of April 23rd, 1960 modifies the institutional organization of the Togolese Republic.
The Chamber of Deputies has deliberated and adopted, 
The Prime Minister promulgates the law as follows:
Title I
On the Togolese Republic
Article 1. Togo shall be an independent republic, sovereign and democratic.  The national emblem, the national anthem, and the motto shall be designated by law.
Title II 
Of the Institutions
Section I
On the Chamber of Deputies
Article 2. Legislative power shall belong to the Chamber of Deputies, which shall pass the law.
Article 3. The Deputies shall be elected by universal direct suffrage, for a term of six years.
Article 4. The Deputies, the Prime Minister, and his Council of Ministers shall hold legislative power.
Article 5. Within thirty days of its presentation and passing, the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers may, with a statement of justification, request a new deliberation of a law by the Chamber of Deputies.  This deliberation cannot be refused.
Article 6. The Chamber of Deputies may censure the Government’s policy by voting on the motion with absolute majority of its Deputies.  No vote may be held for three days after the submission of the motion.
Article 7. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers may by decree dissolve the Chamber of Deputies.  The law shall determine the conditions under which this right of dissolution may be exercised.
Article 8. No Deputy shall be prosecuted, searched, arrested, detained, or passed judgment upon because of his expressed opinions or votes cast in the exercise of his duties.
Article 9. Except in the case of a flagrant offense, no Deputy shall, in the course of his term of office, be prosecuted or arrested on criminal or correctional grounds, without the authorization of the lifting of his immunity by the Chamber, through an absolute majority. 
Section II
On the Government
Article 10. The executive power shall belong to the Government, which shall assure the management of public affairs.
The Government shall be represented by a Prime Minister.
Article 11. The office of the Chamber of Deputies shall upon a candidate to take on the position of Prime Minister.  This person shall present himself before the Chamber of Deputies to be granted this position.
Article 12. The Prime Minister shall be accorded his position by a simple majority vote.  He shall have the authority to select the ministers who shall comprise his Council of Ministers.  He shall also have the authority to remove them from office.
Article 13. The position of Prime Minister or of a Minister shall be considered incompatible with the office of the President of the Chamber of Deputies, the duties of a member of the office of the Chamber, and those of a member of the related commissions.
Article 14. The Prime Minister shall preside over the Council of Ministers.
Article 15. The Prime Minister shall delegate certain of his powers to each of the Ministers of his Cabinet, that they may take both leadership and responsibility in the exercise of their duties.
Article 16. The Prime Minister shall be appointed for a period equal to the duration of the term of the Members of the Chamber of Deputies.  This period shall only conclude upon the inauguration of the new Prime Minister, who shall take office by the eighth day of the first session held by the Chamber of Deputies after its renewing. 
Article 17. The Prime Minister may solicit the confidence of the Chamber of Deputies.  The Chamber shall not deny him this except by vote of an absolute majority of the Deputies of the Chamber.  After deliberation of the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister may pose a hearing of confidence to the Chamber.  The vote on the question of confidence shall occur three days after it was presented before the Chamber.  To facilitate public scrutiny, a roll-call vote will be taken in the Chamber.
Article 18. A no-confidence vote by the Chamber shall result in the resignation of the Government.  Following a no-confidence vote or the resignation of the Prime Minister, the Government shall remain in place until the inauguration of the next Prime Minister. 
Article 19. The Prime Minister shall have regulatory authority.  He shall manage the public services of the Republic, in accordance with the allocated budgets for each.  He shall determine the scope and direction of each of these services.  The Prime Minister’s acts shall be countersigned, such being the case, by the Minister or Ministers charged with their execution, and a record shall be published in the Official Journal of the Togolese Republic.  These policies may be subject to legal sanctions. 
Section III
On Justice
Article 20. Justice shall be rendered in the name Togolese people.  Accordingly, all judgments shall be pronounced and executed in the name of the Togolese people.  The organization and functioning of the judiciary shall be established by law.
Article 21. The judges shall be independent, and permitted to exercise their duties through the authority of the law.  Magistrates of the bench shall be permanent.
Article 22. Until the establishment of the Togolese high court’s jurisdiction, the judgments and rulings of the Togolese courts of law and administration may be subject to appeal before the French Court of Cassation and the Council of State, in certain conditions decided by a convention.
Title III
On the Chief of State
Article 23. The Chief of State is the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity, and enforcement of treaties. The Chief of State shall have the authority of pardon.  The Chief of State shall have the authority to accredit Ambassadors to foreign powers.  He shall also accredit his own Ambassadors and Special Envoys.  The Prime Minister shall assume the powers of the Chief of State, until otherwise established.
Title IV
On Nationality and Citizenship
Article 24. Togolese nationals shall be granted Togolese citizenship.
Article 25. Togolese nationality shall be defined by law.
Article 26. All citizens shall be equal before the law.  They shall have the same rights and responsibilities. 
Title V
On International Relations
Article 27. The Togolese Republic shall affirm its commitment to the upholding of international treaties and conventions. 
Article 28. The Chief of State shall have the authority to negotiate and ratify treaties. 
Article 29. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, and treaties relative to international organizations, as well as those involving the State’s finances, those which modify legislative provisions, those which relate to the status of individuals and human rights, and those which involve the suspense, exchange or adjunction of territory cannot be ratified except by law.  Such treaties shall not take effect until they have been ratified or approved. 
Article 30. Upon their publication, treaties or agreements which are ratified through regular procedures or approved shall have superior authority over those laws subject to them, so long as they have been applied by the other party also.  
Title VI
Various Provisions
Article 31. The laws, statutes and conventions approved through regular procedures and promulgated throughout Togo, upon this law’s date of entry into force, shall endure, so long as their modification or abrogation do not fall under the conditions determined in the law in question.
Article 32. Following a proposed law signed by one third of the members of the Chamber of Deputies, the Prime Minister, with the approval of the Council of Ministers and the Chamber of Deputies, may call for an amendment to the organic law in question.  No modification shall come into force prior to a vote on a law to this effect, adopted by a two-thirds majority of the Chamber’s members. 
Article 33. The law in question shall come into effect the Twenty-Seventh of April, 1960.
Completed in Lomé, the 23rd April, 1960.
S. E. Olympio