Praise to the One God,
The members of the National Assembly elected on October 23, 2011.
In respect of the principles of the Revolution and its objectives, and in the spirit of the martyrs and the sacrifice of Tunisians, and in order to guarantee democratic liberties and human rights,
After reviewing the decision of the National Assembly from July 25, 1957 announcing the proclamation of the Republic,
After reviewing decree 14 – 2011 dated March 23, 2011, concerning the provisional organization of public authorities,
Considering that the National Assembly is the main legitimate authority has the responsibility of preparing a Constitution in accordance with the objectives of the Tunisian revolution and to supervise the management of the affairs of the country until the adoption of the Constitution and the implementation of permanent institutions, 
In the name of the Tunisian people we promulgate this Act on the provisional organization of public authorities:
Article 1. Public authorities in Tunisia will be provisionally organized in conformity with the provisions of this law until a new constitution enters into force.
Title I 
Functions of the Constituent National Assembly 
Article 2. The Constituent National Assembly primarily writes the Constitution of the Tunisian Republic, and deals with the following tasks:
1. The exercise of legislative power
2. The election of the president of the Constituent National Assembly
3. Election of the president of the Republic 
4. Control over government activity 
Title II 
Constituent Power 
Article 3. The Constituent National Assembly approves each article of the Constitution by an absolute majority of its members that will be thereafter approved in its totality by a majority of the two thirds of the members of the Assembly, in case of impossibility, the vote will be taken by the same majority in response to a second reading in a period not exceeding one month from the first reading, and if not possible the project of the Constitution will be submitted to a referendum, so that it is ratified by the majority of voters. 
Title III 
Legislative Power
Article 4. The Constituent National Assembly exercises legislative power in conformity with this law. The government or ten members of the Constituent National Assembly has the power to propose bills. The Constituent National Assembly ratifies fundamental laws by an absolute majority of its members. Ordinary laws are ratified by a majority of present members on the condition that the number cannot be less than one third of the members of The Constituent National Assembly. 
Article 5. The Constituent National Assembly can excuse the president of his duties with the consent of an absolute majority of its members based on a reasoned application presented to the office of the Assembly by at least one third of the members. The Assembly, chaired by the First Vice-president must elect a president in conformity with the procedure in Article 10 of the present law. The first vice-president of the Constituent National Assembly will temporarily occupy the presidency until the election of a new president. 
Article 6. The following take the form of organic laws:
The ratification of treaties
Organization of the judiciary 
Media organization, the press, and publishing
Organization and financing of political parties, associations and non-governmental organizations, and professional organizations
Organization of the national armed forces, except for special regimes which are issued by Presidential decree
Organization of internal security forces, except for special regimes which are issued by decree
The electoral system
Liberties and human rights and the right to work and the right to organize [labor unions]
Personal status
The following take the form of ordinary laws:
General methods for applying basic law governing public authorities, except for those which concern organic laws
Nationality and its duties
Proceedings before courts
Amnesty 
Crimes, offenses and penalties thereof but also offenses requiring custodial sentences
System of the exchange program
Loans and financial obligations of the State
Fundamental guarantees granted to civil servants
The law defines basic principles for:
The system of property and real rights
Education and scientific research and Culture
Public health 
Labor law and social security 
Energy management 
Environment and urban development 
Other provisions are a part of the head of the government’s regulatory power and take the form of a regulatory decree.
Article 7. In exigent circumstances which prevent the normal functioning of public bodies and which render it impossible for the Constituent National Assembly to perform its objectives, the Assembly can delegate its legislative competence or a part of it to the President of the Assembly, to the President of the Republic, or the head of government. 
And the three Presidents can exercise by decrees made between them.
The Council meets by invitation of the President or by one third of its members to put an end to the delegation by a majority of its members. Then it decides on decrees issued for approval, amendment, abrogation. 
Article 8. The elected Constituent National Assembly cannot be sued, stopped or judged because of its opinions or suggestions or activities during the exercise of its mandate.  
The elected Constituent National Assembly cannot be sued, arrested for offense or crime during its mandate as long as the Assembly did not remove immunity. In the case of a flagrant offense, it will be possible to stop it, in that case the Assembly must be immediately informed, the same can request a stay of proceedings. 
Title IV
Executive Power 
Section I
The President of the Republic
Article 9. A candidate [male or female] for presidency must be Tunisian Muslim, cannot hold any other nationality, of Tunisian parents, and at least 35 years of age.
The President of the Republic must renounce all partisan responsibility and being a member of the Constituent National Assembly as soon as his election. 
Article 10. The Constituent National Assembly elects the President of the Republic by a secret vote by an absolute majority of its members. 15 members of the Assembly choose a candidate and no more. 
If none of the candidates obtain an absolute majority in the first round, a second round is organized for the two first candidates and in case of equal votes, the oldest will be elected. 
Article 11. Duties of the President of the Republic:
1. He is the representative of the State of Tunisia and with the head of the government has the responsibility to establish the foreign policy of the State. 
2. He approves and publishes the laws voted on by the Constituent National Assembly fifteen days after their deposit at the latest with the departments concerned. In case of delay in ratification and publication, the bill will be re-voted on and in this case, will be done by the President of the Constituent National Assembly.
3. Appointment of the Prime Minister conforms to the provisions of Article XV of this law and the oath is in front of him. 
4. Appointment of the Mufti of the Republic, in accordance with the Prime Minister.
5. High Command of the Armed Forces.
6. Declarations of war and declarations of peace after approval of two thirds of the Constituent National Assembly.
7. Declarations of provisions and of exceptional measures, if circumstances occur which disturb the normal function of public authorities, after consultation with the Prime Minister and the President of the Constituent National Assembly.
8. Ratifies treaties approved by the Constituent National Assembly no later than fifteen days from the date of deposit of the department concerned and if ratification has not taken place, the treaty must return to the Constituent National Assembly for a new vote in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 4 of the present law. In this case, the President of the Constituent National Assembly will ratify the treaty. 
9. The exercise of special amnesty. 
10. Appointments and exemptions in senior military functions in accordance with the Prime Minister.
11. Appointments to senior positions at the Presidency of the Republic. 
12. Accreditation of representatives of States, organizations, and international and regional organizations. 
13. Appointments to the Department of Foreign Affairs for diplomatic and consular missions from States, regional and international organizations, in accordance with the Prime Minister.
14. Order of publication for the implementation of finance bills through premiums in three months if approval of the Finance Act has not occurred by December 31 at the latest. 
That which is issued by the President of the Republic takes the form of a republican decree. 
Article 12. The official residence of the President of the Republic is Tunis and its suburbs, but can, in exceptional circumstances, be temporarily transferred to any other part of the territory of the Republic. 
Article 13 . The Constituent National Assembly can exempt the President from his duties with the approval of an absolute majority of the Assembly after a reasoned request to the President of the Constituent National Assembly by at least one third of its members. 
The Assembly must in the fifteen days from the date of exemption elect a new president in conformity with the procedures set forth in Article X of the present law. The President of the Constituent National Assembly takes the role of president of the Republic during the period of the exemption. 
Article 14. In case the President of the Republic cannot perform his office temporarily, he can delegate his powers to the Prime Minister for a period that cannot exceed three months. 
The PR must inform the President of the Constituent National Assembly of the temporary delegation of these powers. 
During this temporary vacancy, the government remains in office until the end of the vacancy. 
If the vacancy is longer than three months, or until the vacancy returns to disability, death or resignation. The President of the Constituent National Assembly temporarily takes the office of the President of the Republic until the election of a new president within fifteen days, in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article X of the present law. 
Section II 
The Government
Article 15. The President of the Republic assigns to the candidate of the party that has the greatest number of seats in the Constituent National Assembly to form a government.
The Prime minister forms his government and reports to the President of the Republic in a period not longer than fifteen days of its composition. 
The President of the Republic must notify the president of the Constituent National Assembly of the composition of the government.  
The President of the Constituent National Assembly convokes a general assembly three days at the latest from the date of the formation of the government for approval by an absolute majority of its members. 
In case there is no formation of a government in a period of fifteen days or in case of failure to obtain the trust of the Constituent National Assembly. The President of the Republic proceeds with consultations with the parties, coalitions, and parliamentary blocs to assign a person to the formation of the government with the same procedures and same timeframe. 
Article 16. The head of government must, after having received the confidence of the Constituent National Assembly, resign his position as elected at the meeting. With the exception of the Prime minister, the combination between the government and the assembly is possible, however, in this case, it will not be possible for a member of government to a member of the Office of the Constituent National Assembly or any of the standing committees. Similarly, he cannot participate in a vote when it concerns questions regarding finance laws motions of confidence. 
Article 17. The government exercises executive power except that which is attributed to the President of the Republic.
The government ensures the implementation of laws and its chief regulatory issues and individual orders that are signed after discussion before the Council of Ministers and informs the President of the Republic. 
The head of government is also responsible for:
1. Presidency of the Council of Ministers
2. Creating, modifying, and removing ministers and secretaries of state and defining their jurisdiction after discussion before the Council of Ministers and informing the President of the Republic.
3. Creating and modifying institutions and public companies as well as administrative services and determining their jurisdiction after discussion before the Council of Ministers and informing the President of the Republic. 
4. Approving decisions taken by Ministers. 
5. Appointments to high civil offices, in consultation with the Minister concerned and with the Council of Ministers. 
Article 18. The government manages the state’s activities and the normal operations of the public services and the functioning of the administration and public powers.
Ministers ensure that everyone in their sectors is in accordance with good functioning of the central administration and supervision of institutions and public enterprises under the supervision of the Prime Minister and in accordance with the laws and regulations in force.
Article 19. A vote for a motion of censure against the government or one of the ministers, after a request to the President of the Constituent National Assembly by at least one third of the members. 
It is necessary in order to withdraw confidence, the consent of an absolute majority of the members of the Assembly.
If the majority mentioned has not met, the motion of censure cannot be repeated against the government or the request to withdraw the confidence of the same minister until three months later. 
In case of a withdrawal of confidence in the government, it is considered resigned from office and the president of the republic assigns in this case the person who is the most apt to form a new government who will enjoy the confidence of the Constituent National Assembly in the same periods and with the same procedures set forth in Article XV of the present law. 
In case of withdrawal of confidence in a minister, he is considered to be resigned and the head of government presents another person who will have the confidence of the Constituent National Assembly in the same periods and with the same procedures as set forth in Article XV of the present law. 
The resignation does not take effect until after the inauguration of the new government or of the new minister.
In case of vacancy of the post of Prime minister due to disability or death, the president of the republic appoints a candidate of the party that won the greatest number of seats in the Constituent National Assembly as Prime minister in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of the present law. 
Section III
Conflicts of Jurisdiction 
Article 20. Disputes concerning the jurisdiction of the President of the republic and the Prime minister are raised before the Constituent National Assembly who must decide the dispute by a majority of its members after having taken the opinion of the full assembly of the administrative court followed by a request submitted to the Constituent National Assembly.  
Section IV
Local Councils
Article 21. Municipal councils, special delegations, regional councils and structures that the law confers on them, the quality of local councils exercise their jurisdiction in conformity with the law until these groups are revised by the Constituent National Assembly. The Prime minister after consultation with the President of the Republic, the President of the Constituent National Assembly and the members, parties dissolve councils, special delegations, or design new delegations each time the need arises.
Title V
The Judiciary
Article 22. The judiciary is independent. 
After consultation with judges, the Constituent National Assembly promulgates an organic law of which a provisional representative will be created.  The Constituent National Assembly will determine its composition, its powers, and its mechanisms to supervise the judicial order and to replace the High Council of the judiciary. 
The Constituent National Assembly promulgates basic laws for a new reorganization of a judicial system and the reconstruction of judicial bodies, administrative and financial. But also to determine the basis of judicial reform according to international norms and judicial independence.  
Article 23. The administrative court and the court of auditors exercises their power in accordance with the laws and regulations in force.
Title VI
Transitional Justice
Article 24. The Constituent National Assembly adopted a basic law governing transitional justice and determines its competence. 
Title VII
The Electoral Commission
Article 25. The Constituent National Assembly passed a law under which it will create a permanent independent public authority responsible for the organization of elections, referendums, and their supervision. The same law will determine its composition and its organization.
Title VIII
Specific Provisions for the Central Bank of Tunisia 
Article 26. The governor of the Central Bank is nominated by presidential decree after agreement with the President of the republic and the Prime minister. The nomination will not take effect under after approval by a majority of members of the Constituent National Assembly. The decision must be made within a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of submitting the application to the President of the Constituent National Assembly. 
The deputy governor of the Central Bank is appointed by a presidential decree after agreement with the President of the Republic and the President of the Constituent National Assembly and the Prime Minister at the proposition of the Governor of the Central Bank. 
The members of the Administrative Council of the Central Bank are appointed by a presidential decree with the agreement of the president of the republic, the president of the Constituent National Assembly and the prime minister. 
The Governor of the Central Bank can be exempted from his office by the same procedures adopted for his appointment or by a request by one third of the members of the Constituent National Assembly. 
The Deputy Governor and the members of the Administrative Council are exonerated by the same procedures adopted for their appointment for those of the second and third paragraphs of this Article. 
Title IX
Final Provisions
Article 27. The Constituent National Assembly recognizes the suspension of the Constitution of June 1959 and decides to terminate its effects by this Constitutional Act and ends all laws that are incompatible with this Constitutional Act and with decree No. 14 – 2011 dated March 23, 2011, regarding the provisional organization of public powers and keep in force all legal texts which are not in conflict with the present Constitutional Act. 
Article 28. The present law enters into force as soon as the Constituent National Assembly approves it. 
This law must be published in the Official Journal of the Republic of Tunisia and executed as law of the State. 
Carthage, December 16, 2011. 
The President of the Republic
Mohammed Moncef Marzouki