THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE

CONSTITUTION
OF

THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, ENTEBBE, UGANDA

THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

WHEREAS under the provisions of article 145 of the Constitution of 15th, April, 1966, Parliament has made provision for the establishment of a Constituent Assembly to enact a Constitution in place of the said Constitution: NOW THEREFORE we the members of the National Assembly having resolved ourselves into a Constituent Assembly here assembled in the name of all the people of Uganda: HAVING FIRMLY RESOLVED in harmony with our inalienable right to choose the means whereby we shall be governed: IN SYMPATHY with our aspirations for national unity, peace, prosperity and progress: DO HEREBY RESOLVE on this 8th day of September, 1967, in the name of all the people of Uganda, for ourselves and our generations yet unborn, that the Government Proposals be adopted, and do constitute and form the Constitution of Uganda which shall come into force the day and year aforesaid. LONG LIVE UGANDA.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA.
f ARTICLE.

ARRANGEMENT

O F ARTICLES.

CHAPTER

I.

T H E REPUBLIC OF UGANDA.

1. 2. 3.

Constitution to be supreme law. Republic of Uganda. Alteration of Constitution. CHAPTER II.

4>

CITIZENSHIP.

4. 5. 6. 7.

Citizens of Uganda. Powers of Parliament. Dual citizenship. Preferential treatment of citizens of other countries. CHAPTER III.

PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL R I C H T S AND FREEDOMS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.

Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. Protection of right to life. Protection of right to personal liberty. Protection from slavery and forced labour. Protection from inhuman treatment. Protection from deprivation of property. Protection for privacy of home and other property. Provisions to secure protection of law. Protection of freedom of conscience. Protection of freedom of expression. Protection of freedom of assembly and association. Protection of freedom of movement. Protection from discrimination on grounds of race, etc. Provisions for times of war or public emergency. Enforcement of protective provisions. Interpretation and savings.

ARTICLE.

CHAPTER IV.
THE EXECUTIVE.

Part II—Procedure in National Assembly. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. Oaths to be taken by members of National Assembly. Presiding in National Assembly. Quorum in National Assembly. Voting in National Assembly. Unqualified person sitting or voting. Mode of exercising legislative power. Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures. Regulation of procedure in National Assembly. Part HI—Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution. 61. 62. Sessions of Parliament. Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament.

Part I—The President and Vice-President. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. President of Uganda. Qualifications of President. Election of President, etc. Determination of questions as to election of President. Oath to be taken by President. Term of office of President. Vote of no confidence. Removal of President for incapacity. Vice-President. Part II—Ministers and the Cabinet. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. Appointment of Ministers and Deputy Ministers. Functions of Ministers and Deputy Ministers. Attorney-General. Oaths to be taken by Ministers, etc. Cabinet. Meetings of Cabinet. CHAPTER V.
PARLIAMENT.

CHAPTER VI.
LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE POWERS.

Part I—Legislative Powers. 63. 64. Power to make laws for Uganda. Legislative powers of President. Part II—Executive Powers. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. Executive power of Uganda. Constitution of offices. -Permanent secretaries. Police forces. Control of police forces. Tenure of office of Auditor-General and Inspector-General. Director of Public Prosecutions. Qualifications of Director of Public Prosecutions. Prerogative of Mercy. Advisory Committee on Prerogative of Mercy. Functions of Advisory Committee. Power of President to make treaties, etc. Declaration of war. Command of Armed Forces. Exercise of President's functions.

Part I—Composition of Parliament. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. Parliament of Uganda. Composition of National Assembly, etc. Qualifications for membership of National Assembly. Disqualifications for membership of the National Assembly. Speaker. Deputy Speaker. Election of elected members. Qualifications of voters. Electoral Commission. Constituencies. Election of specially elected members. Tenure of office of members of National Assembly. Determination of questions as to membership of National Assembly. Clerk to National Assembly and his staff.

ARTICLE.

ARTICLE.

CHAPTER VII.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATIONS.

CHAPTER X.
T H E PUBLIC SERVICES OF UGANDA.

80. 81. 82.

Districts of Uganda. Administration of Districts. Administration of Districts in certain circumstances.

CHAPTER
THE

VIII.

101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107.

Public Service Commission. Teaching Service Commission. District Service Committees, etc. Appointment, etc., of public officers. Appointment, etc., of representatives of Uganda abroad. Protection of pension rights. Power of appropriate authority in relation to pensions, etc. CHAPTER XI.

JUDICATURE.

Part I—The 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. . 88.

High Court of

Uganda. 108. 109. Land Commission. Interpretation.

PUBLIC LAND.

High Court of Uganda. Appointment of judges of High Court of Uganda. Tenure of office of judges. Oaths to be taken by judges. Questions of interpretation of Constitution. Early hearing for Constitutional and election cases. Part II—Appeals.

CHAPTER X I I .
GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS.

89.

Right of appeal. Part III—Judicial Service Commission.

90. 91.

Judicial Service Commission. Appointment, etc., of judicial officers. CHAPTER IX.
FINANCE.

92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100.

Consolidated Fund. Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund, etc. Authorisation of expenditure. Authorisation of expenditure in advance of appropriation. Contingencies Fund. Remuneration of certain officers. Public debt. Auditor-General. Payments to Districts, etc.

110. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130.

Capital of Uganda. Official language. Performance of functions of Commissions. Resignations. Reappointments and concurrent appointments. Existing law. Existing offices. Oaths deemed to have been taken. Abolition of institution of kingship, etc. Pending matters. Succession to property. Succession to contracts. Vesting of other rights, etc. Legal proceedings. Validation of appointments of certain officers. International agreements, etc. Mailo land tenure. Compulsory retirement to facilitate appointment candidates. Appeals Board. Cessation of Constitution of April, 1966. Interpretation. SCHEDULES. Schedule Schedule 1—The Boundary of Uganda. Z—The Boundaries of Districts of Uganda.

of

local

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA. CHAPTER I.
T H E REPUBLIC OF UGANDA.

9

1. (1) This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda. Constitution (2), Subject to the provisions of article 3, if any other supreme law. law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. t 2. (1) Uganda shall be a Republic and shall be known Republic of gan a as the Republic of Uganda. ' (2) The Republic of Uganda shall consist of all those areas which are more particularly delineated in Schedule 1 to this Constitution. 3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament Alteration of may alter any of the provisions of this Constitution. Constitution. (2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this article, a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall not be passed in the National Assembly unless it has been supported on the second and third readings by the votes of a majority of all the members of the National Assembly. (3) A, bill for an Act of Parliament under this article, so far as it provides for an alteration to any provision of Chapter I, II or III or article 30, 31, 39, 48, 58, 80, 83, 84 (2), 85 or 90 of this Constitution or any provision of Schedule 1 or 2 to this Constitution shall not be passed in the National Assembly unless it has been supported on the second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the elected members of the National Assembly. (4) The President shall not signify his assent to a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article unless that bill is accompanied by the certificate of the Speaker signed by him certifying that that bill has been supported in the National Assembly as required by this article and that certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the facts so certified. (5) In this article, references to any of the provisions of this Constitution include references to any law, or any instrument made under a law, that amends, modifies, re-enacts with or without amendment or modification or makes different provision in lieu of that provision.

CHAPTER

II.

CITIZENSHIP.

4. (1) T h e following persons shall be citizens of Uganda, that is to say, (a) every person who on the commencement of this Constitution is a citizen of Uganda; (b) every person born in Uganda after the commencement of this Constitution one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a citizen of Uganda; (c) every person born outside Uganda after the commencement of this Constitution one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a citizen of Uganda, provided that his father was a citizen of Uganda otherwise than by virtue of this paragraph, at the time of that person's birth or, in case of the father's death before that person's birth, at the time of the father's death; (d) every person lawfully registered as a citizen of Uganda after the commencement of this Constitution. (2) Any person being a minor whose, father acquires citizenship by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (d) of clause (1) of this article after the coming into force of this Constitution, shall by virtue of that acquisition be a citizen of Uganda. (3) T h e provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall apply to any person being a minor, who at the coming into force of this Constitution is a person whose father acquired citizenship of Uganda by registration under the law then in force. (4) T h e following persons, if not citizens of Uganda, shall be entitled to be registered as citizens of Uganda, upon making application in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, that is to say, (a) any woman who is or at any time has been married to a citizen of Uganda; (b) any woman who was at any time married to a person who but for his death before 9th October, 1962, would have become a citizen of Uganda on that date.

(5) For the purposes of this Chapter, a person born aboard a registered ship or aircraft or aboard an unregistered ship or aircraft of any country, shall be deemed to have been born in the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country. 5. (1) Parliament may make provision for the acquisition Powers of of citizenship of Uganda by persons who are not eligible or P a r h a m e n t who are no longer eligible to become citizens of Uganda under the provisions of this Chapter. (2) Parliament may make provision for depriving of his citizenship of Uganda any person who is a citizen of Uganda otherwise than by virtue of his birth. (3) Parliament may make provision for the renunciation by any person of his citizenship of Uganda. 6. (1), Any person who, upon the attainment of the age Dual citizen of twenty-one years, is a citizen of Uganda and also a citizen shipof some country other than Uganda shall, subject to clause (5) of this article, cease to be a citizen of Uganda upon attaining the age of twenty-two years unless he has renounced his citizenship of that other country, taken the oath of allegiance and, in the case of a person born outside Uganda, made and registered such declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) A citizen of Uganda shall cease to be such a citizen if, (a) having attained the age of twenty-one years, he acquires the citizenship of some other country other than Uganda by voluntary act, other than marriage; or (b) having attained the age of twenty-one years, he otherwise acquires the citizenship of some other country other than Uganda and has not, within one year of acquiring that citizenship, renounced that citizenship, taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed by Parliament. (3) A person who, (a) becomes a citizen of Uganda by registration under article 4; and

(b) is immediately after the day upon which he becomes a citizen of Uganda also a citizen of some other country, shall, subject to clause (5) of this article, cease to be a citizen of Uganda at the expiration of three months after that day unless he has renounced the citizenship of that other country, taken the oath of allegiance, and made and registered such declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed by Parliament. (4) For the purposes of this article, where, under the law of a country, other than Uganda, a person cannot renounce his citizenship of that other country, he need not make such renunciation but he may instead be required to make such declaration concerning that citizenship as may be prescribed by Parliament. (5) Provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament for extending the period in which any person may make a renunciation of citizenship, take an oath or make or register a declaration for the purposes of this article, and if such provision is made that person shall cease to be a citizen of Uganda only if at the expiration of the extended period he has not then made the renunciation, taken the oath or made or registered the declaration, as the case may be. 7. Parliament may make provision for according preferential treatment to citizens of a Commonwealth country or of any other country which is a member of any international organization of which Uganda is a member or with which Uganda is in association, on a reciprocal basis. CHAPTER III.
PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(c) protection for the privacy of his home and other property and from deprivation of property without compensation. (3) No citizen of Uganda shall enjoy any special privilege, status or title by virtue of his birth, descent or heredity. (4) No law whatsoever shall confer ' any special privilege, status or title upon any citizen of Uganda on the ground of his birth, descent or heredity. (5) In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms referred to in clause (2) of this article, no person shall prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest. (6) The provisions of this article shall have effect subject to the limitations contained in this Chapter. 9. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life inten- Protection of tionally save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect right to Ilfeof a criminal offence under the law of Uganda of which he has been convicted. (2) Without prejudice to any liability for a contravention of any other law with respect to the use of force iri such cases as are hereinafter mentioned, a person shall not be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contravention of this article if he dies as the result of the use of force to such extent as is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of the case, (a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the defence of property; (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully detained; (c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or mutiny; (d) in order to prevent the commission by that person of a criminal offence, or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war. 10. (1) No person shall be deprived of his personal Protection of liberty save as may be authorised by law in any of the right to following cases, that is to say, fiberty.al (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a court, whether established for Uganda or some other country, in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been convicted;

8. (1) Every person in Uganda shall enjoy equal protection of the law of Uganda. (2) Every person in Uganda shall enjoy the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right to each and all of the following, namely, (a) life, liberty, security of the person and the protection of the law; (b) freedom of conscience, of expression and of assembly and association; and

(b) in execution of the order of a court punishing him for contempt of that court or of a court inferior to it; (c) in execution of the order of a court made to secure the fulfilment of any obligation imposed on him by law; (d) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; (e) upon reasonable suspicion of having committed, or being about to commit, a criminal offence under the law of Uganda; (/) in the case of a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years, for the purpose of his education or welfare; (g) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or contagious disease; (h) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol, or a vagrant, for the purpose of his care or treatment or the protection of the community; (i) for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of that person into Uganda, or for the purpose of effecting the expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that person while he is being conveyed through Uganda in the course of his extradition or removal as a convicted prisoner from one country to another; (;) for the purpose of making, varying, discharging or enforcing an order providing for the detention of any person or restriction of any person to any residence or area within Uganda or for prohibiting him from being within any such area or for restricting his possession of specified articles or his association and communication with other persons or for requiring him to notify his movements to any specified authority or imposing conditions reasonably necessary for the purpose of enforcing any such detention, restriction, prohibition or requirement; (k) for the purpose of restraining any person during any visit that he is permitted to make to any part of Uganda in which his presence would otherwise be unlawful.

(2) Any person who is arrested, detained or restricted shall be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands, of the reasons for his arrest, detention or restriction. (3) Any person who is arrested or detained, (a) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; or (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed or being about to commit, a criminal offence under the law of Uganda, and who is not released, shall be brought without undue delay before a court; and if any person arrested or detained as mentioned in paragraph (b) of this clause is not tried within a reasonable time, then without prejudice to any further proceedings that may be brought against him, he shall be released, either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to a trial. (4) Any person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by any other person shall be entitled to compensation therefor from that other person. (5) Where a person is detained or restricted by virtue of such law as is referred to in paragraph (;) of clause (1) of this article or of paragraph (c) of clause (3) of article 19 of this Constitution, the following provisions shall apply, that is to say, (a) he shall, not more than twenty-eight days after the commencement of his detention or restriction, be furnished with a statement in writing in a language that he understands specifying the grounds upon which he is detained or restricted and shall be afforded an opportunity of making representations in writing to the authority by which his detention or restriction was ordered; (b) his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law and presided over by a person appointed by the Chief Justice, and such review shall be held, (i) as soon as reasonably practicable where the person detained or restricted has made representations to the authority by which his detention or restriction was ordered; or

(ii) in any other case not more than two months after the commencement of his detention or restriction, and thereafter during his detention or restriction, at intervals of not more than six months; (c) he shall be afforded reasonable facilities to consult, at his own expense, a legal representative of his own choice who shall be permitted to make representations to the tribunal; (d) at the hearing of his case by the tribunal he shall be permitted to appear in person or, at his own expense, by a legal representative of his own choice; (e) the tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing the detention or restriction, or the modification of any conditions attending thereto on any* grounds including ill-health and good behaviour, to the authority by which the detention or restriction was ordered. (6), Where a person is in detention by virtue of such law as is referred to in clause (5) of article 21 of this Constitution and when the declaration of the state of public emergency ceases to have effect, is further detained by virtue of such law as is referred to in paragraph (j) of clause (1) of this article or of clause (3) of article 19 of this Constitution, the provisions of sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph (b) of clause (5) of this article shall not apply in respect of such person. (7) Unless it is otherwise provided by law, the authority to which recommendations are made pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (5), of this article shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendations. (8) No order made under such law as is referred to in paragraph (j) of clause (1) of this article shall be questioned in any court. 11. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.
ry

(b) labour required of any person while he is lawfully detained which, though not required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or for the maintenance of the place at which he is detained; (c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force in pursuance of his duties as such or, in the case of a person who has conscientious objections to service as a member of a naval, military or air force, any labour which that person is required by law to perform in place of such service; (d) any labour required during any period when Uganda is at war or in the event of any emergency or calamity which threatens the life and well-being of the community, to the extent that the requiring of such labour is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing during that period or as a result of such emergency or calamity, for the purpose of dealing with that situation; or (e) any labour reasonably required as part of reasonable and normal communal or other civic obligations.

'

12. (1) No person shall be subjected to torture or to Protection inhuman or degrading punishment or other like treatment, ^hwnan (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question authorises the infliction of any punishment that was lawful in Uganda immediately before 9th October, 1962. 13. (1) No property of any description shall be compul- Protection sorily taken possession of, and no interest in or right over deprivation property of any description shall be compulsorily acquired, of property, except where the following conditions are satisfied, that is to say, (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, public health, town and country planning or the development or utilisation of any property in such manner as to promote the public benefit; and

(2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression "forced labour" does not include, (a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court;

(b) the necessity therefor is such as to afford reasonable justification for the causing of any hardship that may result to any person having an interest in or right over the property; and (c) provision is made by a law applicable to that taking of possession or acquisition, (i) for the prompt payment of adequate compensation; and (ii) securing to any person having an interest in or right over the property a right of access to the High Court, whether direct or on appeal from any other authority, for the determination of his interest or right, the legality of the taking of possession or acquisition of the property, interest or right and the amount of any * compensation to which he is entitled, and for the purpose of obtaining prompt payment of that compensation. (2) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the making or operation of any law so far as it provides for the taking of possession or acquisition of property, (a) in satisfaction of any tax, rate or due; (b) by way of penalty for breach of the law, whether under civil process or after conviction of a criminal offence under the law of Uganda; (c) as an incident of a lease, tenancy, mortgage, charge, bill of sale, pledge or contract; (d) by way of the vesting or administration of trust property, enemy property or the property of persons adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt or insolvent, persons of unsound mind, deceased persons, or bodies corporate or unincorporate in the course of being wound up; (e) in the execution of judgments or orders of courts; (/) by reason of its being in a dangerous state or injurious to the health of human beings, animals or plants; (g) in consequence of any law with respect to the limitation of actions; or

(h) for so long only as may be necessary for the purposes of any examination, investigation, trial or inquiry or, in the case of land, the carrying out thereon, (i) of work of soil conservation or the conservation of other natural resources; (ii) of agricultural development or improvement that the owner or occupier of the land has been required, and has, without reasonable and lawful excuse, refused or failed to carry out; or (iii) of mining or prospecting operations. (3) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the making or operation of any law for the compulsory taking of possession in the public interest of any property, or the compulsory acquisition in the public interest of any interest in or right over property, where that property, interest or right is held by a body corporate established by law for public purposes in which no moneys have been invested other than moneys provided by Parliament. 14. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be Protection subjected to the search of his person or his property or the entry oThomTand by others on his premises. other
property.

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision, (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, the investigation of crime, public health, town and country planning, the development and utilisation of mineral resources, or the development or utilisation of any other property in such a manner as to promote the public benefit; (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of promoting the rights or freedoms of other persons; (c), that authorises an officer or agent of the Government of Uganda, the East African Common Services Organization, a local authority or a body corporate established by law for

a public purpose to enter on the premises of any person in order to inspect those premises or anything thereon for the purpose of any tax, rate or due or in order to carry out work connected with any property that is lawfully on those premises and that belongs to that Government, Organization, authority or body corporate, as the case may be; (d) that authorises, for the purpose of enforcing the judgment or order of a court in any civil proceedings, the search of any person or property by order of a court or entry upon any premises by such order, and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. t 15. (1), If any person is charged with a criminal offence, of then, unless the charge is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law. (2) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence, (a) shall be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has pleaded guilty; (b) shall be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands, of the nature of the offence charged; (c) shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence; (d) shall be permitted to defend himself before the court in person or, at his own expense, by a legal representative of his own choice; (e) shall be afforded facilities to examine in person or by his legal representative the witnesses called by the prosecution before the court, and to obtain the attendance and carry out the examination of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the court on the same conditions as those applying to witnesses called by the prosecution; and

(/) shall be permitted to have without payment the assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand the language used at the trial of the charge, and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence. (3) When a person is tried for any criminal offence, the accused person or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall, if he so requires and subject to the payment of such reasonable fee as'may be prescribed by law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment a copy for the use of the accused person of any record of the proceedings made by or on behalf of the court. (4), No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission that did not, at the time it took place, constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed for any criminal offence that is severer in degree or description than the maximum penalty that might have been imposed for that offence at the time when it was committed. (5) No person who shows that he has been tried by a competent court for a criminal offence and either convicted or acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or for any other criminal offence of which he could have been convicted at the trial for that offence, save upon the order of a superior court in the course of appeal or review proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal. (6) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if he shows that he has been pardoned for that offence. (7) No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial. (8) No person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless that offence is defined and the penalty therefor is prescribed in a written law: Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent a court of record from punishing any person for contempt of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and the penalty therefor is not prescribed.

(9) Any court or other adjudicating authority prescribed by law for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation shall be established by law and shall be independent and impartial; and where proceedings for such a determination are instituted by any person before such a court or other adjudicating authority, the case shall be given a fair hearing within a reasonable time. (10) Except with the agreement of all the parties thereto, all proceedings of every court and proceedings for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation before any other adjudicating authority, including the announcement of the decision of the court or other authority, shall be held in public. (11) Nothing in the last foregoing clause shall prevent the court or other adjudicating authority from excluding from the proceedings persons other than the parties thereto and t their legal representatives to such extent as the court or other authority, (a) may consider necessary or expedient in circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice or interlocutory proceedings; or (b) may be empowered by law to do so in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, the welfare of persons under the age of eighteen years or the protection of the private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings. (12) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of, (a), paragraph (a) of clause (2) of this article to the extent that the law in question imposes upon any person charged with a criminal offence the burden of proving particular facts; (b) paragraph (e) of clause (2) of this article to the extent that the law in question imposes conditions that must be satisfied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an accused person are to be paid their expenses out of public funds; (c) clause (5) of this article to the extent that the law in question authorises a court to try a member of a disciplined force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction

or acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of that force, but any court so trying such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into account any punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law. (13) For the purposes of this article, the expression, "criminal offence" means a criminal offence under the law of Uganda; and "legal representative" means a person entitled to practise in Uganda as an advocate. *

16. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be Protection of hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of conscience, and conscience, for the purposes of this article, the said freedom includes freedom of thought and of religion, freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others, and both in public and in private, to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance. (2) Except with his own consent, or if he is a minor, the consent of his guardian, no person attending any place of education shall be required to receive religious instruction or to take part in or attend any religious ceremony or observance if that instruction, ceremony or observance relates to a religion other than his own. (3) No person shall be compelled to take any oath which is contrary to his religion or belief or to take any oath in a manner which is contrary to his religion or belief. (4) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision which is reasonably required, (a), in the interests of national economy, the running of essential services, defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons, including the right to observe and practise any religion without the unsolicited intervention of members of any other religion, and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

17. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of expression, that is to say, freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information without interference, and freedom from interference with his correspondence. (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision, (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of national economy, the running of essential services, defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons or the private lives of persons ? concerned in legal proceedings, preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of the courts, or regulating telephony, telegraphy, posts, wireless broadcasting, television, public exhibitions or public entertainments; or (c) that imposes restrictions upon public officers, and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. 18. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of assembly and association, that is to say, his right to assemble freely and associate with other persons and in particular to form or belong to trade unions or other associations for the protection of his interests. (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision, (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of the national economy, the running of essential services, defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons; or

(c), that imposes restrictions upon public officers; or (d) that imposes such restrictions as are set out in paragraph (;') of clause (1) of article 10; or (e) for the regulation of industrial or labour disputes; or (/) for the proper management of trade unions and co-operative societies or associations; or (g) for the regulation and control of the formation, management and operation of political parties. 19. (1) No person shall be deprived of his freedom of Protection of movement, and for the purposes of this article the said free- ^ 0 ^ ^ . dom means the right to move freely throughout Uganda, the right to reside in any part of Uganda, the right to enter Uganda and immunity from expulsion from Uganda. (2) Any restriction on a person's freedom of movement that is involved in such detention or restriction as may be authorised by law as mentioned in article 10 shall not be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article. (3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article, to the extent that the law in question makes provision, (a) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a court, that are reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety or public order on the movement or residence within Uganda of any person; (b) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a court, on the movements or residence within Uganda of any person either in consequence or his having been found guilty of a criminal offence under the law of Uganda or for the purpose of ensuring that he appears before a court at a later date for trial of such criminal offence or for proceedings preliminary to trial or for proceedings relating to his extradition or other lawful removal from Uganda; (c) for the imposition of restrictions that are reasonably required in the interests of national economy, the running of essential services, defence, public safety, public order, public

morality or public health on the movement or residence within Uganda of any person or persons generally, or any class of persons, and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; (d) for the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement of any person who is not a citizen of Uganda; (e) for the imposition of restrictions on the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property in Uganda; (/) for the imposition of restrictions upon the movement or residence within Uganda of public officers; or (g) for the removal of a person from Uganda to be tried outside Uganda for a criminal offence or to undergo imprisonment in some other country in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence under the law of Uganda of which he has been convicted. (4) If any person whose freedom of movement has been restricted by the order of a court by virtue of such a provision as is referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (3) of this article so requests at any time during the period of that restriction not earlier than six months after the order was made or six months after he last made such request, as the case may be, his case shall be reviewed by that court or, if it is so provided by law, b)^ an independent and impartial tribunal presided over by a person appointed by the Chief Justice. (5) On any review by a court or a tribunal in pursuance of clause (4) of this article of the case of any person whose freedom of movement has been restricted, the court or tribunal may, subject to the provisions of any law, make such order for the continuation or termination of the restriction as it may consider necessary or expedient. 20. (1) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4)„ (5) and (7) of this article, no law shall make any provision that is discriminatory either of itself or in its effect. 18

(2) Subject to the provisions of clauses (6), (7) and (8) of this article, no person shall be treated in a discriminatory manner by any person acting by virtue of any written law or in the performance of the functions of any public office or any public authority. (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression "discriminatory" means affording different treatment to different persons attributable wholly or mainly to their respective descriptions by race, tribe, place of origin, political opinions, colour or creed whereby persons of one such description are subjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another such description are not made subject or are accorded privileges or advantages which are not accorded to persons of another such description. (4) Clause (1) of this article shall not apply to any law so far as that law makes provision, (a) for the appropriation of public revenues or other public funds; or (b) with respect to persons who are not citizens of Uganda; or (c) with respect to citizenship of Uganda in accordance with article 5; or (d) with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce, burial, devolution of property on death or other matters of personal law; or (e) for the application in the case of members of a particular race or tribe of customary law with respect to any matter to the exclusion of any law with respect to that matter which is applicable in the case of other persons; or (/) for the imposition of restrictions on the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property in Uganda; or (g) whereby persons of any such description as is mentioned in clause (3) of this article may be subjected to any disability or restriction or may be accorded any privilege or advantage which, having regard to its nature and to special circumstances pertaining to those persons or to
1Q

persons of any other such description, is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or (h) for the employment of a proportion of African citizens of Uganda in any trade, business, profession or occupation. (5) Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of clause (1) of this article to the extent that it makes provision with respect to qualifications for service as a public officer or as a member of a disciplined force or for the service of a local authority or a body corporate established directly by any law. (6) Clause (2) of this article shall not apply to anything which is expressly or by necessary implication authorised to be done by any such provision of law as is referred to in clause (4) or (5) of this article. (7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision whereby persons of any such description as is mentioned in clause (3) of this article may be subjected to any action or restriction authorised by law in accordance with clause (1) of article 10, clause (2) of article 14, clause (4) of article 16, clause (2) of article 17, clause (2) of article 18, or clause (2) or (3) of article 19, as the case may be. (8) Nothing in clause (2), of this article shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, conduct, or discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in any court that is vested in any person by or under this Constitution or any other law. 21. (1) advice of published emergency T h e President acting in accordance with the the Cabinet may at any time, by Proclamation in the Gazette, declare that a state of public exists in Uganda or any part thereof.

fourteen days beginning with the date of publication of the declaration; , (b) in any other case, at the expiration of a period of thirty days beginning with the date of publication of the declaration, unless, before the expiration of that period the declaration of a state of public emergency is approved by a resolution passed in,that behalf by not less than one-half of all the members of the National Assembly. (3) Subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this article, a declaration of a state of public emergency approved by resolution of the National Assembly under the provisions of clause (2) of this article shall continue in force until the expiration of a period of six months beginning with the date of its being so approved or until such earlier date as may be specified in the resolution: Provided that the National Assembly may by resolution extend its approval of the declaration for periods of not more than six months at a time. (4) T h e National Assembly may by resolution passed by a majority of the members of the Assembly at any time revoke a declaration of a state of public emergency approved by the Assembly under the provisions of this article. (5) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of an Act of Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of article 10, IS, 19 or 20 of this Constitution to the extent that the Act authorises the taking during any period when Uganda is at war or any period when a declaration of a state of public emergency under this article is in force, of measures that are necessary for the purpose of dealing with the situation that exists during that period: Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply in relation to anything contained in or done under the authority of any instrument having the force of law that is made under the provisions of an Act of Parliament, during a period when a declaration of a state of public emergency is in force by virtue of a resolution of the National Assembly, unless the Assembly has, by a like resolution, affirmed that that instrument shall have effect during that period. (6), Where a person is detained by virtue of such law as is referred to in clause (5) of this article the following provisions shall apply, that is to say, 71

(2) A declaration of a state of public emergency under the provisions of this article, if not sooner revoked, shall cease to have effect, («) in the case of a declaration made when Parliament is sitting or has been summoned to meet within fourteen days, at the expiration of a period of 20

(a) he shall, as soon as reasonably practicable and in any case not more than two months after the commencement of his detention, be furnished with a statement in writing in a language that he understands specifying the grounds upon which he is detained; (b) not more than twenty-eight days after the commencement of his detention a notification shall be published in the Gazette stating that he has been detained and giving particulars of the provision of law under which his detention is authorised; (c) not more than three months after the commencement of his detention and thereafter during his detention at intervals of not more than six months, his case shall be reviewed by an indepen-1 dent and impartial tribunal established by law and presided over by a person appointed by the Chief Justice; (d) he shall be afforded reasonable facilities to consult, at his own expense, a legal representative of his own choice who shall be permitted to make representations to the tribunal appointed for the review of the case of the detained person; (e) at the hearing of his case by the tribunal appointed for the review of his case he shall be permitted to appear in person or, at his own expense, by a legal representative of his own choice. (7) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this article of the case of a detained person, the tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing his detention or the modification of any conditions attendant thereto on any grounds including ill-health and good behaviour, to the authority by which it was ordered but, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendations. (8) The Minister shall every three months publish in the Gazette the total number of persons detained by virtue of such a law as is referred to in clause (5) of this article.
22

(9) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this article and for any law made pursuant thereto the expression "detention" means detention under an order of the Minister. 22. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (5) of this ^ f nf °^ m . en e t article, if any person alleges that any of the provisions of provisions™6 articles 8 to 20 inclusive has been, is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, then, without prejudice to any other action with respect to the same matter that is lawfully available, that person may apply to the High Court for redress. (2) The High Court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine afny application made by any person in pursuance of clause (1) of this article, and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing, or securing the enforcement of, any of the provisions of the said articles 8 to 20 inclusive to the protection of which the person concerned is entitled: Provided that the High Court shall not exercise its powers under this clause if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law. (3) Any person aggrieved by any determination of the High Court under this article may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal under article 89. (4) No appeal shall lie from any determination under this article that any application is merely frivolous or vexatious. (5) Parliament may make provision, or may authorise the making of provision, with respect to the practice and procedure of any court for the purposes of this article and may confer upon that court such powers, or may authorise the conferment thereon of such powers, in addition to those conferred by this article as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling that court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by this article. 23. (1) In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise interpretarequires, ™ d "African" means a person who is a member of an indigenous African tribe or community of Uganda
T2

or a body corporate or unincorporate entirely composed of such persons; "contravention" in relation to any requirement, includes a failure to comply with that requirement, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; "court" means any court of law in Uganda, other than a court established by a disciplinary law, the Court of Appeal and in articles 9 and 11 a court established by a disciplinary law; "disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline, (a) of any disciplined force; or (b) of persons serving prison sentences; "disciplined force" means, (a) a naval, military or air force; (b) the Uganda Police Force; (c) a police force established by law enacted by Parliament; or (d) the Uganda Prisons Service; "member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline. (2) References in this Chapter to public officers include references to officers and employees in the service of the East African Common Services Organization. (3) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised under any law in force in Uganda, nothing contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter other than articles 9, 11 and 12. (4) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised otherwise than as aforesaid and lawfully present in Uganda, nothing contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter. Part I—The

CHAPTER
THE

IV.

EXECUTIVE.

President and

Vice-President.

24. (1) There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be President the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in- of u s a n d a Chief of the Armed Forces of Uganda. (2) Except as is provided in clause (1) of this article, the President shall not hold any other office of profit. (3) T h e President shall take precedence over all persons in Uganda and shall not be liable to any proceedings whatsoever in any court. (4) T h e President personal taxation. shall be exempt from direct

(5) T h e President shall receive such salary, allowances and gratuity and on retirement from office such pension or other allowances, as may be prescribed by Parliament. (6) T h e salary, allowances and gratuity payable to the President and any pension or other allowances payable to him on retirement, are hereby charged upon the Consolidated Fund. (7) For the purpose of this article the expression "retirement" includes resignation and cessation to hold office for any cause. 25. A person shall be qualified to be the President and shall not be so qualified unless, (a) he is a citizen of Uganda; (b) he has attained the age of thirty-five years; and (c) he is qualified to be a member of the National Assembly. 0 26. (1) Whenever Parliament is dissolved, a person shall be elected to the office of President at the general election of the elected members of the National Assembly and for that purpose the following provisions shall apply, that is to say, (a) every political party taking part in a general election shall nominate one of its members as a Presidential candidate;
-7C

Qualifications of President.

Election of President, etc.

24

(b) every person nominated as a Parliamentary candidate shall at the time of his nomination declare in the manner prescribed by Parliament, which Presidential candidate he supports and unless he so declares his nomination as a Parliamentary candidate shall be null and void: Provided that a Parliamentary candidate who is nominated as a Presidential candidate shall not be required to make such declaration and accordingly his nomination as a Parliamentary candidate shall not be rendered null and void by reason only that he has not so declared; (c) the Presidential candidate nominated by the party having the greatest numerical strength of elected members returned after a general election and consisting of not less than forty per centum of all the elected members of the National1 Assembly, shall be the President; (d) where after a general election there are more than one party having the numerical strength referred to in the immediately preceding paragraph and one of the said parties had the greatest numerical strength of members of the National Assembly returned to the Assembly at the immediately preceding general election, the Presidential candidate nominated by that party shall become the President; (e) where after a general election, (i), there are more than one party having the numerical strength referred to in paragraph (c) of this clause and none of the said parties had the greatest numerical strength of the members of the National Assembly returned to the Assembly at the immediately preceding general election; or (ii) there is no party having the numerical strength referred to in paragraph (c) of this clause, the general election shall be null and void and a fresh general election shall be held within three months from the date of the declaration of the result of that general election.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament may prescribe the procedure for the election of the President. (3) For the purposes of the foregoing provisions of this article the person holding office as President immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, on such commencement, be deemed to have been elected as President with effect from 15th April, 1966. (4) On the death in office of the President or his resignation, other than a resignation at the instance of the National Assembly under article 30, the party having the greatest numerical strength in the National Assembly shall elect as President any person qualified under article 25 of this Constitution to be the President or if Parliament is dissolved, the Cabinet shall appoint one of their members to be the President. (5) For the purposes of the immediately preceding clause the National Assembly or, as the case may be, the Cabinet shall meet within twenty-four hours of the death or resignation of the President. (6) A person who holds or has held office as President shall be eligible to become or to be elected President. (7) In this article, "general election" means a general election of elected members of the National Assembly following a dissolution thereof; "Parliamentary candidate" means a person nominated for election to the National Assembly at a general election; "Presidential candidate" means a person nominated by a political party for election as President. 27. (1) For the purposes of article 26 of this Constitution Determinathe High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine
questions as

,:

any question whether the President was validly elected. *° election (2) Parliament may make provision with respect to, (a) the persons who may apply to the High Court for determination of any question under this article; (b\ the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any such application may be made; and
TT

(c) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to any such application. (3) T h e determination by the High Court of any question under this article shall not be subject to appeal. 28. Before assuming office the President shall take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and such other oath, if any, as may be prescribed by Parliament. 29. (1) A person who is elected or appointed President shall assume the office of President within twenty-four hours of the declaration of his election or appointment. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a person shall hold office as President for a term of five years beginning with the day on which he takes and subscribes the oath of allegiance in accordance with the provisions of article 28 of this Constitution. (3) Where a person assumes the office of President by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (d) of clause (1) of article 26 of this Constitution, he shall hold office for a term not exceeding two years. (4) Where a person assumes the office of President otherwise than after a general election, he shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term of the person whom he succeeds as President. (5) T h e President may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed to the Chief Justice, resign the office of President. (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the President shall hold office until such time as some other person becomes President. 30. (1) Whenever a resolution is passed by the National Assembly in accordance with the provisions of this article as a vote of no confidence in the Government, the President shall resign the office of President. (2) A motion for a vote of no confidence in the Government shall not be carried in the National Assembly unless, (a) at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-half of all the members of the National Assembly has been given of their intention to move the motion; and 28

(b) the motion has been passed by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National Assembly. (3) Where a resolution of no confidence in the Government is passed by the National Assembly in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall stand dissolved and a general election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 31. (1) If the Cabinet resolves upon a motion proposed Removai0f by any member thereof and supported by the votes of a President majority of all the members of the Cabinet that the question incapacity, of the mental or physical capacity of the President to discharge the functions of his office ought to be investigated and so informs the Chief Justice, then, (a) the Chief Justice shall appoint a board consisting of five persons who are qualified medical practitioners under the law of Uganda or of any other country and who have been so qualified for not less than five years; and (b) the board shall inquire into the matter and shall make a report to the Chief Justice stating the opinion of the board whether or not the President is, by reason of any infirmity of body or mind, incapable of discharging the functions of his office. (2) Where a resolution is passed by the Cabinet under clause (1) of this article, the President shall, until another person assumes the office of President or the board appointed in pursuance of that clause reports that the President is not incapable of discharging the functions of his office, whichever is the earlier, cease to perform the functions of his office. (3) If the board appointed under this article reports that the President is incapable of discharging the functions of the office of President, the Chief Justice shall certify in writing accordingly and shall submit the report together with his certificate to the Cabinet. (4) T h e Cabinet shall inform the President of the contents of the report submitted under the immediately preceding clause and unless the President resigns, he may be removed from office by the National Assembly upon a resolution in that behalf or if Parliament is dissolved, by the Cabinet in like manner. 29

(5) For the purposes of paragraph (b) of clause (1) of this article the opinion of the majority of all the members of the board shall be the opinion of the board. 32. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of Uganda who shall be appointed by the President from among the members of the National Assembly. (2) Where, however, occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Vice-President while Parliament is dissolved, any person who was a member of the National Assembly before the dissolution may be appointed as VicePresident. (3) The Vice-President shall on entering upon the duties of his office take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and such other oath for the execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament if he has not already taken any, such oath. (4) The Vice-President shall perform such functions of the Government of Uganda including the administration of any department of Government as the President may, in writing, assign to him. (5) The Vice-President shall receive such salary, allowances and gratuity and on retirement from office such pension or other allowances, as may be prescribed by Parliament. (6) The salary, allowances and gratuity payable to the Vice-President and any pension or other allowances payable to him on retirement are hereby charged upon the Consolidated Fund. (7) Whenever the Vice-President is absent from Uganda or is incapable by reason of illness or any other cause of discharging the functions, of his office, the President may appoint a Minister to perform the functions of the VicePresident and any person so appointed may discharge those functions accordingly. (8) The office of Vice-President shall become vacant, (a) upon the assumption of any person to the office of President; (b) if the appointment of the holder of the office is revoked by the President;
30

(c) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the National Assembly for any reason other than a dissolution of Parliament. (9) For the purposes of this Constitution, the person holding office as Vice-President immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed Vice-President by the President from among the members of the National Assembly. (10) For the purposes of this article the expression, "retirement" includes resignation and cessation to hold office for any cause. Part II—Ministers and the Cabinet. 33. (1) The President may, from among the members of Appointment the National Assembly, appoint Ministers or Deputy °nd Deputy
Ministers: Ministers.

Provided that if occasion arises for making appointments while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the National Assembly immediately before the dissolution may be so appointed. (2) The office of a Minister or of a Deputy Minister appointed under this article shall become vacant, (a) if a new President assumes office; (b) if the holder of the office resigns; (c) upon the assumption of any person to the office of President; (d) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; (e) if the President so directs; or (/), if, at the first sitting of the Assembly after any dissolution of Parliament, the holder of the office is not a member of the Assembly. (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, any person holding office as Minister or Deputy Minister immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed such Minister or Deputy Minister, as the case may be.

Df

34. (1), A Minister shall be responsible for such functions ty of the Government of Uganda including responsibility for any department of the Government as the President may, by directions in writing, assign to him. (2) Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of the Government of Uganda, he shall be responsible for the administration of that department and shall exercise direction and control of that department and in the discharge of his functions under this article, he shall be responsible to the Cabinet. (3) A Deputy Minister shall assist such Minister as the President may specify in the performance of that Minister's functions under this article. 35. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be the principal legal adviser to the Government of Uganda, and a Minister of the Government appointed by the President. t (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Attorney-General shall represent Uganda in all legal proceedings and shall on behalf of Uganda exercise or perform any of her rights, prerogatives, privileges or functions before any court. vacant, (3) T h e office of the Attorney-General shall become

(2) T h e functions of the Cabinet shall be to formulate and implement the policy of the Government of Uganda and in the performance of this function the Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to Parliament. (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, any person holding office as Minister of Cabinet rank immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed to the Cabinet by the President. 38. (1) T h e Cabinet shall be summoned by the President Meetings of Cabinet. or in his absence by the Vice-President. (2) T h e President shall so far as is practicable attend and preside at all meetings of the Cabinet and in the absence of the President the Vice-President shall preside. (3) If for any cause the President and the VicePresident are unable to attend any meeting of the Cabinet, such Minister as the President shall in writing appoint, shall preside at the meeting of the Cabinet.

C H A P T E R V.
PARLIAMENT.

(a) if a new President assumes office; (b) if the holder of the office resigns; (c) upon the assumption of any person to the office of President; or (d) if the President so directs. (4) For the purposes of this Constitution, the person holding office as Attorney-General immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed Attorney-General and a Minister of the Government. 36. A Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament. 37. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers consisting of the President, the Vice-President and such other Ministers as may be appointed to the Cabinet by the President.

Part I—Composition

of

Parliament.

39. There shall be a Parliament of Uganda which shall Parliament of u a n d a consist of the President and a National Assembly. § 40. (1) T h e National Assembly shall consist of,
w

.

J

Composition
of National

(a) eighty-two elected members or such other number Assembly, as Parliament may prescribe; and (b) such number of specially elected members as may be required to give the party having the greatest numerical strength of elected members in the National Assembly a majority of not more than ten of all the members of the Assembly. (2) T h e number of specially elected members referred to in paragraph (b) of the preceding clause shall be determined at the time when the results of a general election of the members of the National Assembly are published in the Gazette and shall be calculated on the basis of the results as

32

33

published; and the number so determined shall not be increased or decreased during the life of the Parliament to which it relates. (3) For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that where such a party as is referred to under paragraph (b) of clause (1) of this article has a majority of, ten or more of all the elected members of the Assembly, there shall be no specially elected members. (4) If a person who is not a member of the National Assembly, (a) becomes President; (b) is elected to the office of Speaker of the Assembly; or (c) is appointed to the office of Attorney-General, that person shall, by virtue of holding that office, be a member of the National Assembly in addition to the members referred*1 to in clause (1) of this article. (5) For the purposes of clause (2) of this article and notwithstanding any provision of this article, the number of specially elected members in the National Assembly which comes into being on the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to be nine. 41. Subject to the provisions of article 42 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless, (a) he is a citizen of Uganda who has attained the age of twenty-one years; and (b) he is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by blindness or other physical cause, to read the official language well enough to take an active part in the proceedings of the Assembly.

(d) is adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind under any law in force in Uganda; or (e) is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in Uganda or under sentence of imprisonment, by whatever name called, exceeding six months imposed on him by such a court or substituted by competent authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court. (2) Parliament may provide that a person who is the holder of any office the functions of which involve, (a) any responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election to the National Assembly;' or (6) any responsibility for the compilation or revision of any register of voters for elections to the Assembly, shall not be qualified to be a member of the Assembly. (3) Parliament may provide that a person shall not be qualified to be a member of the Assembly for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be prescribed if he is convicted of any such offence connected with elections to the Assembly as may be prescribed or he is expelled from the Assembly after having been found guilty of contempt of Parliament by a committee of the National Assembly. (4) Parliament may provide that, subject to such exceptions and limitations, if any, as may be prescribed, a person shall be disqualified for membership of the National Assembly by virtue of, (a) his holding or acting in any office or appointment that may be prescribed; or (b) his belonging to any disciplined force. (5) For the purposes of this article, (a) two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds six months, and if any one of such sentences exceeds that term they shall be regarded as one sentence; and (b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed as an alternative to or in default of the payment of a fine. 35

p

i42. (1) No person shall be qualified to be a member of j the National Assembly who, (a) is a member of a District or Municipal Council; (b) has made a declaration of allegiance to a country other than Uganda; (c) has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged; 34

(6) Until Parliament otherwise provides, no person shall be qualified to be a member of the National Assembly who is the holder of an office which would have disqualified him for membership of the National Assembly under the law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution. (7) In this article "disciplined force" has the same meaning as in Chapter I I I of this Constitution. 43. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the members of the Assembly from among persons who are members of the Assembly or who are qualified to be elected as such. (2) A Minister, the Attorney-General or a Deputy Minister shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker. (3) T h e Speaker shall vacate his office, (a) if, having been elected from among the members of the National Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would disqualify him for election as such; (c) if he resigns his office; (d) if a petition for his removal is addressed to the President by members of the National Assembly and is signed by not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National Assembly; or (e) when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution of Parliament. (4) No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly, other than an election to the office of Speaker, at any time when the office of the Speaker is vacant. 44. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the members of the Assembly from among persons who are members of the Assembly other than Ministers, the Attorney-General or Deputy Ministers. (2) T h e members of the National Assembly shall elect a person to the office of Deputy Speaker when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution of Parliament and, if the
if.

office becomes vacant otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament, at the first sitting, of the Assembly after the office becomes vacant or as soon as is convenient thereafter. (3) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office, (a) if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly; (b) if he becomes a Minister, the Attorney-General or a Deputy Minister; (c) if he resigns his office; or (d) if a petition for his removal is addressed to the President by members of the National Assembly and is signed by not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National Assembly. 45. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the elected Election of members of the National Assembly shall be directly elected members, in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament to represent constituencies established under article 48. (2) T h e registration of voters for the purposes of elections of elected members of the National Assembly and the conduct of direct elections of those members shall be subject to the direction and control of the Electoral Commission. (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, the elected members and the specially elected members of the National Assembly holding office as such members and who have taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and any other oath prescribed by Parliament as required under the Constitution in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, shall, on the coming into force of this Constitution, be deemed to have been directly elected or specially elected, as the case may be, under this Constitution. (4) For the purposes of clause (1) of article 53 of this Constitution, a member of the National Assembly deemed to have been elected under the provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall, upon taking his seat as such member in the National Assembly, be deemed to have taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and any other oath prescribed by Parliament.

37

46. A person who, (a) is a citizen of Uganda; (b) has attained the age of twenty-one years; and (c) has been resident in Uganda for six months immediately preceding the date on which he applies for registration as a voter, shall, unless he is disqualified for registration as a voter under any law, be entitled, upon his making application in that behalf at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament, to be registered as a voter for the purposes of elections of elected members of the National Assembly. 47. (1)^ There shall be an Electoral Commission, which shall consist of a chairman and not less than two other members appointed by the President. (2) A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a member of the Electoral Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly or of a District or Municipal Council or is a public officer. (3) Subject to the provisions of this article, a member of the Electoral Commission shall vacate his office, (a) at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; or (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such; or (c) if he resigns his office. (4) A member of the Electoral Commission may be removed from office by the President but he may be removed only for inability to discharge the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause, or for misbehaviour. 48. (1) Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies as there are elected members of the National Assembly in such manner as the Electoral Commission, acting with the approval of the National Assembly signified by resolution, may prescribe. (2) The boundaries of each constituency shall be such that the number of inhabitants thereof is as nearly equal to the population quota as is reasonably practicable:

Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means of communication, geographical features and density of population. (3) The Electoral Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies at intervals of not less than five and not more than ten years and may alter the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this article to such extent as it may consider desirable in the light of the review. (4) The Commission shall carry out the review and, in accordance with the , provisions of this article, alter the constituencies wherever Parliament has made provision altering the number of elected members of the National Assembly; and, in addition, the Commission may at any time carry out such a review and alter the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this article to such extent as it considers necessary by reason of the holding of a census of the population of Uganda. (5) Where the boundaries of any constituency established under this article are altered, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament. (6) For the purposes of this article, the expression "population quota" means the number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants of Uganda by the number of constituencies into which Uganda is divided under this article. 49. Any specially elected members shall be elected by the Election of party in the National Assembly having the greatest numerical efertedy strength of the elected members of the Assembly, in such members. manner as may be prescribed by Parliament. 50. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall Tenure of vacate his seat in the Assembly upon a dissolution of Parlia- members of ment. ^ratioila,1
Assembly.

(2) A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly, (a) if he ceases to be a citizen of Uganda; (b) if he is absent from the sittings of the Assembly for such period and in such circumstances as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly; or

(c) subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this article, if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified for election as such under clause (1), (3) or (4) of article 42. (3) Parliament may, in order to permit a member of the National Assembly who has been adjudged or declared bankrupt or of unsound mind or sentenced to death or imprisonment to appeal against the decision, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the decision shall not have effect for the purpose of this article until such time as may be prescribed. 'as

(2) Any person elected to the office of Speaker who is not a member of the National' Assembly shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the Assembly. 54. There shall preside at any sitting of the National j ^ ^ f " 1 Assembly,
Assembly.

51. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether, (a) any person has been validly elected as a member of the National Assembly or the seat of an^ member has become vacant; (b) any person has been validly elected as Speaker of the Assembly or, having been so elected, has vacated the office of Speaker. (2) Parliament may make provision with respect to, (a) the persons who may apply to the High Court for the determination of any question under this article; (b) the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any such application may be made; and (c) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to any such application. (3) The determination by the High Court of any question under this article shall not be subject to appeal. 52. (1) There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly. (2) Unless Parliament otherwise provides, the office of the Clerk to the National Assembly and the offices of the members of his staff shall be public offices. Part II—Procedure in National Assembly.

(a) the Speaker; or (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or (c) in the absence of the Speaker and of the Deputy Speaker, such member of the Assembly, not being a Minister, the Attorney-General or a Deputy Minister, as the Assembly may elect for that purpose. 55. If objection is taken by any member of the National Quorum in Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly, Assembly, besides the person presiding, less than twenty members of the Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that the number of members present is still less than twenty, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly. 56. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, Voting in any question proposed for decision in the National Assembly Assembly, shall be determined by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting. (2) The person presiding in the National Assembly shall have neither an original nor a casting vote- and if upon any question before the Assembly the votes are equally divided the motion shall be lost. - (3) The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make provision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted. 57. Any person who sits or votes in the National Assembly Unqualified knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he j^ti° n or is not entitled to do so, commits an offence and shall be liable voting. on conviction to a fine not exceeding two thousand shillings or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year for each day on which he so sits or votes in the Assembly.
At

' 53. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall, f upon taking his seat therein, take and subscribe before the Assembly the oath of allegiance but a member may before taking that oath take part in the election of a Speaker.

58. (1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised by bills passed by the National Assembly and assented to by the President. (2) When a bill passed by the National Assembly and certified, if necessary, as required by article 3 is presented * to the President for assent, he shall signify that he assents to the bill. (3) Without prejudice to the power of Parliament to postpone the operation of any law or to make laws with retrospective effect, a bill shall not become law until it has been duly passed and assented to in accordance with this Constitution. 59. The National Assembly shall not, unless the bill is introduced or the motion is moved by a Minister, (a) proceed upon any bill, including any amendment to a bill, that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes, that is to say, (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; (ii) the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund or other public funds of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public funds of Uganda of any moneys not charged thereon or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal; or (iv) the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or (b\ proceed upon any motion, the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes. 60. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may regulate its own procedure including the conduct of the members of the Assembly. (2) The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership, including any vacancy not filled when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution of
4?

Parliament, and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate those proceedings. Part III—Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution.

f

*

61. (1) Each session of Parliament shall be held at such Sessionsof place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Parl » ament President may appoint. (2) There shall be a session of Parliament at least once in every year so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of Parliament and the first sitting thereof in the next session. (3) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 26 and clause (4) of this article, whenever Parliament is dissolved, a general election of members of the National Assembly shall be held within sixty days of the date of the dissolution and a session of Parliament shall be appointed to commence within thirty days of that date. (4) If, after a dissolution and before the holding of the general election of members of the National Assembly, the President considers that, owing to the existence of a state of war or of a state of emergency in Uganda or any part thereof, it is necessary to recall Parliament, the President shall summon the Parliament that has been dissolved to meet, but, unless the life of Parliament is extended under the provisions of clause (4) of article 62, the general election of members of the National Assembly shall proceed and the Parliament that has been recalled shall, if not sooner dissolved, again stand dissolved on the date appointed for the nomination of candidates in that general election. 62. (1) The President may at any time prorogue Parlia- Prorogation
m e n t

j '

-

solution of

(2) The President may at any time dissolve Parliament. (3) Subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this article, Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved: Provided that where after a dissolution a person assumes the office of President by virtue of paragraph (d) of clause (1) of article 26 of this Constitution, Parliament, unless
43

Parhament

-

sooner dissolved, shall continue for two years from such date and shall then stand dissolved. (4) At any time when Uganda is at war or when a declaration of a state of public emergency under article 21 is in force in Uganda or any part thereof, Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years or of two years, as the case may be, specified in clause (3) of this article for not more than twelve months at a time. (5) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article the Parliament existing immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution the life of which is continued under this Constitution, shall be deemed to have held its first sitting on 15th April, 1966. CHAPTER VI.
LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE POWERS.

Part II—Executive Powers. 65. (1) The executive power of Uganda shall vest in the Executive President and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Uganda, shall be exercised by him, either directly or through officers subordinate to him. (2) In the performance of any function conferred upon him or in the exercise of any rights, prerogatives or privileges vested in him by this Constitution or any other law, the President shall act in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or of any such other law. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on persons or authorities other than the President. 66. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any £f°°|-J.g"t,lon Act of Parliament, the President may constitute offices in the public service of the Government of Uganda. 67. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) of article f ^marfe? 34 of this Constitution, a department of the Government of Uganda shall be under the supervision of a permanent secretary whose office shall be a public office. (2) The functions of a permanent secretary under this article shall include, (a) the organisation and operation of the department; (b) tendering advice to the Minister in respect of the business of the department; (c) implementation of the policy of the Government of Uganda; and (d) responsibility for the proper expenditure of public moneys. 68. (1) There shall be a police force for Uganda, which Police shall be styled the Uganda Police Force, and such other orces' police forces in Uganda as Parliament may prescribe. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every police force in Uganda shall be organised and administered in such manner as Parliament may prescribe. 69. (1) The Uganda Police Force shall be under the Control of command of an Inspector-General of Police, whose office forces, shall be a public office. 45

Part I—Legislative Powers. 63. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have sole power to make laws for the peace, order and good government of Uganda with respect to any matter. 64. (1), Whenever at any time, save when the Assembly is sitting, the Cabinet advises the President that exceptional circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require. (2) If Parliament is dissolved and by reason of the operation of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of article 26 of this Constitution there is no National Assembly, the President may promulgate such Ordinances as circumstances require for the effective government of Uganda during such period. (3) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance, (a) shall be laid before the National Assembly immediately upon its next meeting; (b) shall cease to have effect, but without prejudice to anything done thereunder, at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the National Assembly; and (c) may be repealed by the President or by Parliament.
AA

(2) The President or such other Minister as may be authorised in that behalf by the President may give to the Inspector-General of Police such directions with respect to the maintaining and securing of public safety and public order as he may consider necessary and the Inspector-General shall comply with those directions or cause them to be complied with. (3) The question whether any, and if so, what directions have been given under clause (2) of this article, shall not be inquired into in any court. 70. (1) The provisions of this article shall apply in relation to persons holding the office of Auditor-General or InspectorGeneral of Police. (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person to whom this article applies shall vacate his office when he attains the age of fifty-five or such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament. (3) A person to whom this article applies may be removed from office only for, (a) inability to discharge the functions of his office whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause; (b) failure to discharge the functions of his office; (c) gross misconduct; (d) conduct unbecoming of the holder of the office; or (e) misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this article. (4) A person to whom this article applies shall be removed from office by the President if the question of his removal from office has been referred to a committee.appointed under clause (5) of this article and the committee has recommended to the President that he ought to be removed from office. (5) If the Cabinet represents to the President that the question of removing a person to whom this article applies ought to be investigated, then, (a) the President, shall appoint a committee which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members, being persons who hold or 46

have held office as a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil or criminal matters or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court; and (b) that committee shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the President and recommend to the President whether the person ought to be removed under this article. (6) If the question of removing a person to whom this article applies has been referred to a committee under this article, the President, may suspend the person from performing the functions of his office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked'by the President, and shall in any case cease to have effect if the committee recommends to the President that the person should not be removed. 71. (1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions, Director of whose office shall be a public office. Prosecu(2) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power in any case in which he considers it desirable so to do, (a) to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court, other than a court-martial, in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that person; (b) to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that have been instituted or undertaken by any other person or authority; and (c) to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings ' instituted or undertaken by himself or any other person or authority. (3) The powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions under clause (2) of this article may be exercised by him in person or by officers authorised in that behalf by him acting in accordance with his general or special instructions. (4) For the purposes of this article, any appeal from any judgment in any criminal proceedings before any court, or any case stated or question of law reserved, including any question referred under article 87, for the purpose of any such proceedings, to any other court in Uganda or the Court of Appeal shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings: Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by paragraph (c) of clause (2) of this 47

article shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person. (5) In the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this article, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall be subject to the direction and control of the Attorney-General. 72. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to hold or act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions unless he is entitled to practise as an advocate or solicitor in a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court, and has been entitled for not less than five years to practise as an advocate or solicitor in such a court. (2) For the purposes of this article, a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise as an advocate or a solicitor^ if he has been called, enrolled or otherwise admitted as such, and has not subsequently been disbarred or removed from the roll of advocates or solicitors notwithstanding that, (a) he holds or acts in any office the holder of which is, by reason of his office, precluded from practising in a court; or (b) he does not hold a practising certificate or has not satisfied any other like condition upon which he is permitted to practise. 73. T h e President may, (a) grant to any person concerned in or convicted of any offence a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions; (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for any offence; (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on any person for any offence; or (d) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any person for an offence or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the Government of Uganda on account of any offence. 48

74. (1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the £ £ £ $ * Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of, on Preroga (a) the Attorney-General, who shall be Chairman; and Mercy. (b) not less than six nor more than nine other members appointed by the President. (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Advisory Committee if he is a member of the National Assembly or a member of the Council of a District. (3) A member of the Advisory Committee appointed by the President shall hold office for three years, so however that his seat on the Committee shall become vacant, (a) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Committee, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such; or (b) if he is removed from office by the President for inability to discharge the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or from any other cause, or for misbehaviour. 75. (1) T h e Advisory Committee shall advise the President K J £ 8 o f as to whether he should exerciser any of his powers under Committee, article 73 of this Constitution. (2) Where any person has been sentenced to death for any offence, the Attorney-General shall cause a written report of the case from the trial judge or the person who presided over the court or tribunal, together with such other information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as he may require, to be considered at a meeting of the Advisory Committee for the purposes of the Committee's functions under this article. (3) T h e Advisory Committee may regulate its own procedure. 76. (1), Subject to the provisions of this article, the £°™r^ft President or a person authorised by him in that behalf may ^make" make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements treaties, etc. between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organization or body in respect of any matter.
4Q

(2) A treaty made under the provisions of this article shall be in such terms as may be approved by the Cabinet and, subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this article, shall be subject to ratification by the Cabinet. (3) Any treaty, convention, agreement or other arrangements made by virtue of this article which relates to armistice, neutrality or peace shall be subject to ratification by the National Assembly signified by resolution of the Assembly. 77. (1) The National Assembly may by resolution authorise the President to declare that a state of war exists between Uganda and any other country. (2) The National Assembly may by resolution at any time revoke a declaration of a state of war made under the provisions of this article. 78. (1) The supreme command of the Armed Forces of*1' Uganda shall vest in the President. (2) The powers conferred upon the President by clause (1) of this article shall include, (a) power to determine the operational use of the Armed Forces; (b) power to appoint members of the Armed Forces, to make appointments on promotion to any office in the Armed Forces and to dismiss: any member of the Armed Forces. (3) The President may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as he may think fit, delegate to any member of the Armed Forces any of the powers mentioned in clause (2) of this article. (4) Parliament may regulate the exercise of the powers conferred upon the President by this article. 79. (1) Where the President is required by this Constitution or any law to-consult or to consider or to act in accordance with the advice of any person or authority, the question whether he has exercised or acted in accordance with such advice in any case shall not be inquired into in any court. (2) Where the President is absent from Uganda or is by reason of illness unable to perform his functions under this Constitution, his functions shall be performed by the Vice-President or by such other Minister, as the President or the Vice-President shall, for that purpose, appoint. 50

(3) Where the President is unable to exercise the functions of his office by reason of clause (2) of article 31, those functions shall be performed by, (a) the Vice-President; or (b) during any period when there is no Vice-President or the Vice-President is absent from Uganda, or is unable by reason of illness or any other cause, to perform, the functions of his office, by such Minister as the Cabinet shall appoint: Provided that any person performing the functions of the office of President under this clause shall not exercise the powers of the President to revoke the appointment of the Vice-President or to dissolve Parliament. (4) On the death, resignation or removal of the President, the Vice-President or if there is no Vice-President, such Minister as shall be elected by the Cabinet, shall perform the functions of the President until a President is elected under the provisions of this Constitution. (5) If there is no Vice-President, the Chief Justice shall, for the purposes of the immediately preceding clause, within twelve hours from the death, resignation or removal of the President, summon a meeting of the Cabinet: Provided that the powers of the Chief Justice under this clause shall be limited to summoning the meeting and he shall not attend the meeting. (6) Any person required by this article to perform the functions of the President shall, before commencing~to perform those, functions, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and such other oath, if any, as may be prescribed by Parliament. CHAPTER VII.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATIONS.

80. (1) Uganda shall consist of the Districts of Acholi, Districts of Ankole, Bugisu,* Bukedi, Bunyoro, Busoga, East Mengo, u 8 anda Karamoja, Kigezi, Lango, Madi, Masaka, Mubende, Sebei, Teso, Toro, West Mengo and West Nile. (2) The Districts mentioned in clause (1) of this article shall comprise respectively the parts of Uganda more par-, ticularly delineated in Schedule 2 to this Constitution.

81. Parliament may make provision for the administration of the Districts and, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, may for that purpose provide for, (a) establishing Councils and other local authorities in the Districts and any part thereof; (b) the electing or nominating of some or all of the members of any Council; (c) establishing offices in the Districts or any part thereof, the appointment of persons to those offices and their tenure of office; and (d) empowering a Minister to undertake or otherwise secure the performance of any duties, functions and responsibilities of a Council or other local authority and to suspend or dissolve a Council or other local authority and to suspend, remove or replace any officer thereof.

CHAPTER
THE

VIII.

JUDICATURE.

Part I—The

High Court of

Uganda. ^ f ^ f

83. (1) There shall be a High Court for Uganda, which shall have unlimited jurisdiction throughout Uganda subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any law enacted by Parliament. (2) T h e judges of the High Court shall be the Chief Justice and such number of puisne judges as may be prescribed by Parliament: Provided that the office of a puisne judge shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof. (3) T h e High Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court. (4) T h e High Court shall sit in such places as the Chief Justice may appoint. 84. (1) T h e Chief Justice shall be appointed by President.
the

82. (1) Whenever at any time the Cabinet advises the President that exceptional circumstances exist which render it necessary for immediate action to be taken,with respect to any situation which exists in a District or any part thereof, he may, by statutory instrument, bring into force such law or any part thereof as Parliament may prescribe in that behalf. (2) A statutory instrument made under the preceding clause, if not sooner revoked, shall cease to have effect at the expiration of a period of six months beginning with the date of its publication unless before the expiration of that period the making of the instrument is approved by resolution passed in that behalf by the National Assembly. (3) A statutory instrument approved by resolution of the National Assembly under the provisions of clause (2) of this article shall continue in force until the expiration of a period of twelve months beginning with the date of its being so approved or until such earlier date as may be specified in the resolution: Provided that the National Assembly may by resolution extend its approval of the making of the instrument for periods of not more than six months at a time.
CO

(2) T h e puisne judges shall be appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission. (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court unless, (a) he. is, or has been, a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court; or (b) he is entitled to practise as an advocate in such a court and has been entitled for not less than five years to practise as an advocate in such a court. (4) For the purposes of the immediately preceding clause, a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise as an advocate if he has been called, enrolled or otherwise admitted as such, and has not subsequently been disbarred or removed from the roll of advocates, notwithstanding that, (a) he holds or acts in any office the holder of which is, by reason of his office, precluded from practising in a court; or

Appointment of judges of High Court of Uganda.

(b) he does not hold a practising certificate or has not satisfied any other like condition upon which he is permitted to practise. (5) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the puisne judges as may be designated in that behalf by the President. (6) If the office of any puisne judge is vacant or if any such judge is appointed to act as Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, or if the Chief Justice advises the President that the state of business in the High Court so requires, the President* acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court to act as a puisne judge of that court: Provided that a person may act as a judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of clause (1) of article 85. (7) Any person appointed under clause (6) of this article to act as a puisne judge shall continue to act for the period of his appointment or, if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission: Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of his appointment or the revocation of his appointment, he may thereafter continue to act as a puisne judge for so long as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto. 85. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person holding the office of a judge of the High Court shall vacate that office on attaining the age of sixty-five years or such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is required by the provisions of this article to vacate his office, a person holding the office of a judge of the High

Court may continue in office for so long after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age. (3), A judge of the High Court may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause, or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this article. (4) A judge of the High Court shall be removed from office by the President if the question of his removal from office has been referred to a tribunal appointed under clause (5) of this article and the tribunal has recommended to the President that he ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour. (5) If the Cabinet represents to the President that the question of removing a judge under this article ought to be investigated, then, (a) the President, shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members, being persons who hold or have held office as a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil or criminal matters or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court; and (b) that tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the President and recommend to the President whether the judge ought to be removed under this article. (6) If the question of removing a judge under this article has been referred to a tribunal under this article, the President may suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the President that the judge should not be removed. (7) The provisions of this article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of clause (7) of article 84. 86. A judge of the High Court shall not enter upon the Oaths to be duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath judges/ of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament.

lis of 87, (J) Where any question as to the interpretation of this Con- Constitution arises in any proceedings in any court of law, other than a court-martial, and the court is of opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law the court may, and shall if any party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the High Court consisting of a bench of not less than three judges of the High Court: Provided that no such question need be so referred if the court is of the opinion that it is not sufficiently important to the proceedings to require a reference to the High Court. (2) Where any question is referred to the High Court in pursuance of this article, the High Court shall give its decision upon the question and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the case in accordance with that decision. 88. Where pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution any question is referred to the High Court, ? (a) as to the interpretation of this Constitution; or (b) as to whether any person was validly elected to the office of President or as a member of the National Assembly, the High Court shall proceed to hear and determine the question as soon as may be and may for that purpose suspend any other matter pending before it until the conclusion of that question. Part II—Appeals. 89. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from any such final decision of the High Court of Uganda, other than any decision on any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution, as Parliament may prescribe. (2) No appeal shall lie from the Court of Appeal or, except as provided by this article, from the High Court of Uganda. (3) The High Court of Uganda and the Court of Appeal shall hear and determine any appeal pending before them at the date of the coming into force of this Constitution, but no other court or tribunal shall hear or determine any appeal then pending against any decision of the High Court of Uganda or the Court of Appeal. 56

(4) The provisions of articles 83 to 86 inclusive, which apply to puisne judges, shall apply to judges of the Court of Appeal established by Parliament under this article, save that Parliament may prescribe the number of such judges and may provide that one of such judges shall preside. (5) Parliament may provide that the Chief Justice may be a member of the Court of Appeal established under this article. (6) In this article "the Court of Appeal" means such court of appeal as may be established by Parliament and until such court of appeal is established it means the Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa. (7) This article" shall be subject to clause (3) of article 51. Part III—Judicial Service Commission. 90. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission for Judicial Uganda which shall consist of,
Commission.

(a\ the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman; (b) the Attorney-General; and (c) such other members not exceeding three who shall be appointed by the President. (2) The following provisions shall apply in relation to a member of the Judicial Service Commission appointed by the President, that is to say, (a) a person shall not be qualified for appointment as such unless he has the qualifications prescribed •in clause (3) of article 84; (b) subject to the provisions of this clause, a person appointed as such shall vacate his office at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; and (c) a person appointed as such may be removed from office by the President but he may be removed only for inability to discharge the functions of his office whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause, or for misbehaviour. 91. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, power to Appointappoint persons to hold or act in offices to which this article oTjudiciai applies, including power to confirm appointments, to exercise officers. disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such 57

offices and to remove such persons from office shall be vested in the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission. (2) The functions of the President and the Judicial Service Commission under this article shall be discharged in accordance with any provision made by Parliament for regulating and facilitating the discharge thereof. (3) The offices to which this article applies are, (a) the office of the Chief Registrar or Deputy Registrar of the High Court; (b) the office of Chief Magistrate or Magistrate of any Grade; (c) such other offices connected with or to be held in any court of law other than the High Court, as Parliament may prescribe. (4) References in this article to a court of law do not include references to the Court of Appeal, or a court-martial. CHAPTER IX.
FINANCE.

(2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund of Uganda, other than the Consolidated Fund, unless the issue of those moneys has been authorised by or under any law. (3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless such withdrawal has been approved in the manner prescribed by Parliament. 94. (1) The Minister for the time being responsible for Authorisafinance shall cause to be prepared and laid before the National expenditur. Assembly in each financial year estimates of revenues and expenditure of Uganda for the next following financial year. (2) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill which shall be introduced into the Assembly to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified therein. (3) If in respect of any financial year it is found, (a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a. purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or (b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose by the Appropriation Act or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly. (4) Where in respect of any financial year a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by the National Assembly in accordance with the provisions of clause (3) of this article, a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into the Assembly in the financial year next following the financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those estimates.

92. All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purposes of the Government of Uganda, not being revenues or other moneys that are payable by or under an Act of Parliament into some other fund established for a specific purpose or that may by or under an Act of Parliament be retained by the department of Government that received them for the purpose of defraying the expenses of that department, shall be paid into and form one Consolidated Fund. 93. (1) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except, (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament; or (b) where the issue of those moneys has been authorised by an Appropriation Act, by a supplementary estimate approved by resolution of the National Assembly or by an Act enacted in pursuance of article 95. 58

95. Parliament may make provision under which, if it appears to the Minister responsible for finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government in respect of the period expiring four months from the beginning of that financial year or on the coming into operation of the Act, whichever is the earlier. 96. (1) Parliament may make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorising the Minister responsible for finance, if satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no, other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need. e (2) Where any advance is made from the Contingencies Fund, a supplementary estimate shall be presented as soon as possible for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced. 97. (1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this article applies such salary and such allowances as may be prescribed by Parliament. (2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of the offices to which this article applies shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund. (3) This article shall apply to the offices of judge of the High Court, member of the Electoral Commission, appointed member of the Judicial Service Commission, Auditor-General and Inspector-General of Police. 98. (1) The public debt of Uganda shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund and other public funds of Uganda. (2) For the purposes of this article, the public debt includes the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt. 99. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General for Uganda, whose office shall be a public office. 60

(2) The public accounts of Uganda and of all officers, courts and authorities of the Government of Uganda and of the District Administrations and of such bodies or authorities as may be prescribed by Parliament, shall be audited and reported on by the Auditor-General and for that purpose the Auditor-General or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall have access to all books, records, returns and other documents relating to those accounts. (3) The Auditor-General shall submit his reports to the Minister responsible for finance, who shall cause them to be laid before the National Assembly and to be published soon thereafter. (4) In the exercise of his functions under this Constitution the Auditor-General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority. (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding clause, the Minister responsible for finance may require the Auditor-General to submit a report on any accounts of a specified body or authority and the AuditorGeneral shall comply with such a requirement. 100. Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the Government of Uganda shall pay to each District Administration and Urban Authority a contribution towards the cost of administering the District or area of such amount as Parliament may determine. CHAPTER X.
T H E PUBLIC SERVICES OF UGANDA.
Payments to Districts, etc.

101. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for PubI|c Uganda which shall, subject to the provisions of clause (1) Commission. of article 102, advise the President in respect of the performance of his functions under article 104 of this Constitution. (2) The Public Service Commission shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as Parliament may prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President. (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Public Service Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly, a member of a District Council or Urban Authority Council or if he is a public officer. 61

(4) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a member of the Public Service Commission shall become vacant, (a) at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; or (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such. (5) The President may designate any member of the Public Service Commission, other than the Chairman, as Deputy Chairman of the Commission, so however that not more than two members of the Commission shall be designated as Deputy Chairman of the Commission at any time. (6) A member of the Public Service Commission may be removed from office by the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, but he may be so removed only for, (a) inability to discharge the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause; (b) failure to discharge the functions of his office; (c) gross misconduct; (d) conduct unbecoming of the holder of the office; or (e) misbehaviour. (7) If at any time the office of Chairman of the Public Service Commission is vacant or if the person holding that office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, (a) until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office; or (b) until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such Deputy Chairman or, if there is no member so designated and able to perform the functions of that office, by such one of the other members of the Commission, as may be designated in that behalf by the President. (8) If at any time there are less than three members of the Public Service Commission besides the Chairman or if any such member is appointed to act as Chairman or is 62

for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission to act as a member. (9) Any person so appointed under the provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall, subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this article, continue to act until the office in which he is acting is filled or, as the case may be, until the holder thereof resumes his functions or until his appointment to act is revoked by the President. (10) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament may make provision for regulating the Commission in the performance of its functions. 102. (1) There shall be a Teaching Service Commission Teaching for Uganda which shall advise the President in respect of the commission. performance of his functions under article 104 of this Constitution in respect of the offices of teachers. (2) T h e Teaching Service Commission shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as Parliament may prescribe all of whom shall be appointed by the President. (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Teaching Service Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly, a member of any board or other authority responsible for the management of any school or is a public officer. (4) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of. a member of the Teaching Service Commission shall become vacant, (a) at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; or (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such. (5) T h e President may designate any member of the Teaching Service Commission, other than the Chairman, as Deputy Chairman of the Commission, so however that not more than two members of the Commission shall be designated as Deputy Chairman of the Commission at any time.

(6) A member of the Teaching Service Commission may be removed from office by the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, but he may be so removed only for, (a) inability to discharge the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause; (b) failure to discharge the functions of his office; (c) gross misconduct; (d) conduct unbecoming of the holder of the office; or (e) misbehaviour. (7) If at any time the office of Chairman of the Teaching Service Commission is vacant or if the person holding that office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, (a) until a person has been appointed to and has t assumed the functions of that office; or (b) until a person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such Deputy Chairman or, if there is no member so designated and able to perform the functions of that office, by such one of the other members of the Commission, as may be designated in that behalf by the President. (8) If at any time there are less than two members of the Teaching Service Commission besides the Chairman or if any such member is appointed to act as Chairman or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission to act as a member. (9) Any person so appointed under the provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall, subject to clause (4) of this article, continue to act until the office in which he is acting is filled or, as the case may be, until the holder thereof resumes his functions or until his appointment to act is revoked by the President. (10) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament may make provision for regulating the Commission in the performance of its functions including the establishment of Teaching Service Committees and prescribing their functions.

103. (1) There shall be for each District and Urban ^trict Authority a Service Committee. Committees, (2) A Service Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as Parliament may prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President. (3) A member of a' Service Committee shall hold office for such period and upon such terms as Parliament may prescribe. (4) A Service Committee shall perform such functions as may be conferred upon it by virtue of this Constitution or any other law, in respect of the appointment of persons to hold or act in any offices, in the service of a District Administration or an Urban Authority, including confirmation of appointments, exercise of disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices, and removal of such persons from office. (5) T h e functions of a Service Committee under this article shall be discharged in accordance with such provision as may be made by Parliament for regulating and facilitating the discharge thereof. 104. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Appointpower to appoint persons to hold or act in any offices in the oTpu'biic' public service of the Government of Uganda or of a District officers. Administration or an Urban Authority including power to confirm appointments, to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the President. (2) T h e President may delegate any of his powers' under this article by directions in writing to the Public Service Commission, the Teaching Service Commission, a Service Committee, a public officer or to any other authority as may be prescribed by Parliament, and may in like manner revoke any such delegation. (3) T h e provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall not apply in relation to the office of Permanent Secretary, Auditor-General, Inspector-General of Police or Head of Department. (4) Where the President has delegated any of his powers under clause (2) of this article, any authority to which such powers are delegated shall exercise those powers in accordance with such law as may be made by Parliament in that behalf.

64

65

(5) No person shall be appointed under this article to or to act in any office on the personal staff of the President, except with the concurrence of the President. 105. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the in- offices to which this article applies, including power to make appointments on promotion and transfer, and to remove persons so appointed from any such office, shall vest in the President. (2), The offices to which this article applies are the offices of any Ambassador, High Commissioner or other representative of Uganda in countries other than Uganda. 106. (1) The law applicable to any benefits to which this article applies shall, in relation to any person who has been granted or is or may become eligible for the grant of such benefits, be that in force at the relevant date or any later law^ that is not less favourable to that person. (2), For the purposes of this article, the expression "the relevant date" means, (a) in relation to benefits granted before 9th October, 1962, the date on which those benefits were granted; (b) in relation to benefits granted or that may be granted after 9th October, 1962, to or in respect of a person who was a public officer before that date, 8th October, 1962; and (c) in relation to any benefits granted or that may be granted in respect of any person who becomes a public officer after 9th October, 1962, the date on which he becomes a public officer. (3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to which of two or more laws shall apply in his case, the law for which he opts shall, for the purposes of this article, be deemed to be more favourable to him than the other law or laws. (4) Any benefits to which this article applies, to the extent that those benefits are not a charge upon some other public fund, shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund. (5) The benefits to which this article applies are any benefits payable under any law providing for the grant of any pensions, compensation, gratuities or other like allowances en

to persons in respect of their service as public officers or to the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service. (6) References to the law applicable to any benefits to which this article applies include, without prejudice to their generality, references to any law regulating, for the purpose of determining whether any person is eligible for the grant of such benefits on his retirement from the public service of Uganda, the circumstances in which he is required or permitted to retire. 107. (1) Where under any law anv person or authority has Power of
.. \ ' a discretion, ,
J

"

(a) to decide whether or not any benefits to which pensions, etc this article applies shall be granted; or (b) to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend any such benefits that have been granted, those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the appropriate authority concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them. (2) Where the amount of any benefits to which this article applies that may be granted to any person is not fixed by law, the amount of the benefits to be granted to him shall be the greatest amount for which he is eligible unless the appropriate authority concurs in his being granted benefits of a smaller amount. (3) The appropriate authority shall not concur under clause (1) or clause (2) of this article in action taken on the ground that any person who holds or has held the office of a judge of the High Court, Auditor-General or InspectorGeneral of Police has been guilty of misbehaviour unless he has been removed from office by reason of such misbehaviour. (4) For the purposes of this article, the expression "appropriate authority" means, (a) in the case of benefits for which any person may be eligible in respect of the service in the public service of a person who, immediately before he ceased to be a public officer, was subject to the disciplinary control of the Judicial Service Commission or the Teaching Service Commission or
CJl

appropriate authority in 0

that have been granted in respect of such service, the Judicial Service Commission or the Teaching Service Commission, as the case may be; and (b) in any other case, the Public Service Commission. (5) This article shall apply to any benefits that are or may become payable under any law providing for the grant of pensions, compensation, gratuities or other like allowances to persons in respect of their service as public officers or to the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service.

accruing from the land so vested under paragraph (a) of this clause shall be paid to such authority as Parliament may prescribe. 109. References in this Chapter to land include references intwpretax
. , . , , tion.

to any estate, interest or right in land. CHAPTER XII.

GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS.

110. Kampala shall be the capital of Uganda.
r

Capital
of Uganda.

r

&

CHAPTER

XL
t

111. T h e official language of the Government of Uganda Official ,anguage shall be English. 112. (1) Any Commission established by this Constitution ^ ° n r ^ n c s e may, with the consent of the President or such other Minister of Commisas may be authorised in that behalf, by regulation or other- sions. wise, regulate its own procedure or confer power or impose duties on any officer or authority of the Government of Uganda for the purpose of discharging its functions. (2) Any decision of any Commission established by this Constitution shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof and, subject as aforesaid, the Commission may act notwithstanding the absence of any member or, in the case of the Judicial Service Commission, any vacancy in the office of any appointed member. (3) This article shall be subject to the provisions of this Constitution. 113. (1) Any person who is appointed or elected to any Resignaoffice established by this Constitution may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed or elected: Provided that in the case of a person who holds office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the President, and in the case of a member of the Assembly his resignation shall be addressed to the Speaker. , (2) T h e resignation of any person from any office established by this Constitution shall take effect in accordance with the terms upon which he was appointed or if there are no such terms, when the writing signifying the resignation is
CC\

PUBLIC LAND.

108. (1) There shall be a Land Commission for Uganda. (2) T h e Land Commission shall consist of not more than five members who shall be appointed by the President. (3) T h e Land Commission shall hold and manage any land vested in it by this Constitution or any other law or acquired in Uganda by the Government of Uganda and shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by Parliament. (4) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament may make provision for the tenure of office of members and the procedure of the Land Commission and for regulating the Commission in the performance of its functions including the establishment of District Land Committees and prescribing their functions. (5) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article, land vested in the Land Commission shall include, (a) every official estate held by a corporation sole by virtue of the provisions of the Official Estates Act; (b) any land which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution is vested in the Land Board of a Kingdom or a District, and accordingly all rights, interests and other estates in any such land shall vest in the Land Commission and any moneys
AS

received by the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person authorised by that person or authority to receive it. (3) References in this article to an office do not include a reference to the office of the President. (4) For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that any office established before the coming into force of this Constitution which is inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution shall, on the coming into force of this Constitution be abolished. (5) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article, the expression "office" includes a public office and the offices excluded by clause (3) of article 130 other than the office of the President, from references to an office in the public service. itnt

(b) the Kingdom of Buganda shall be construed as references to the Districts of East Mengo, Masaka, Mubende and West Mengo. (3) The President may, by statutory instrument made at any time before the expiration of twelve months from the date of the commencement of this Constitution, make such amendments to the existing law as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for bringing it into conformity with this Constitution or otherwise for giving effect or enabling effect to be given to any changes effected by this Constitution. (4) Where the President makes an instrument under the provisions of the immediately preceding clause in relation to an Act of the Common Services Organization or the former High Commission, that instrument shall have effect so as to amend that Act in and in relation to any person or matter in or connected with Uganda, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in the Interpretation Act. Cap. 16. (5) Where any matter that falls to be prescribed or otherwise provided for under this Constitution by Parliament or by any other person or authority is prescribed or provided for by or under an existing law, including any amendment to any such law made under this article, or is otherwise prescribed or provided for immediately before the commencement of this Constitution by or under the Constitution as then in force, that prescription or provision shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if it had been made under this Constitution by Parliament or, as the case may be, by the other authority or person. (6) Any reference in the existing law to a provision in the Constitution which came into force on the 15 th day of April, 1966, shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding provision of this Constitution; and where there is any conflict the provisions of this Constitution shall prevail. (7) For the purposes of this article, the expression "existing law" means the written and unwritten law of Uganda or of any part thereof as it existed immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, including any Act of Parliament or statutory instrument enacted or made before that date which is to come into force on or after that date. 116. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, every Easting person who immediately before the commencement of this Constitution held of was acting in any office established by or
TT

114. (1) Where any person has vacated any office established by this Constitution, he may, if qualified, again be appointed or elected to hold that office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (2), Where a power is conferred by this Constitution upon any person to make any appointment to any office, a person may be appointed to that office notwithstanding that some other person may be holding that office, when that other person is on leave of absence pending the relinquishment of the office; and where two or more persons are holding the same office by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of this clause, then, for the purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that office, the person, last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder of that office. (3) References in this article to an office do not include a reference to the office of the President or the Vice-President. 115. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the operation of the existing law after the commencement of this Constitution shall not be affected by such commencement, but the existing law shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution. (2) Unless the context otherwise requires, reference in the existing law to, (a) the Kingdoms of Ankole, Bunyoro and Toro shall be construed as references to the corresponding Districts; and
70

m pursuance of the Constitution as then in force, so far as is consistent with the provisions of this Constitution, shall be deemed to have been appointed as from the commencement of this Constitution to hold or to act in the equivalent office under this Constitution: Provided that any person who before the commencement of this Constitution would have been required under the Constitution as then in force or any existing law to vacate his office at the expiration of any period or on the attainment of any age shall vacate his office at the expiration of that period or on the attainment of that age. (2) The provisions of this article shall be without prejudice to any powers conferred by or under this Constitution or any other law upon any person or authority to make provision for the abolition of office, for the removal from office of persons holding or acting in any office and for requiring persons to retire from office. t (3) In determining, for the purpose of any law relating to retiring benefits or otherwise to length of service, the length of service of a public officer to whom clause (1) of this article applies, service as a public officer under the Government which terminates immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to be continuous with service as a public officer which begins immediately on such commencement. 117. Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, every person who immediately before the commencement of this Constitution held or was acting in any office established by or in pursuance of the Constitution as then in force and who holds or is acting in an equivalent office under this Constitution, shall be deemed to have taken and subscribed any necessary oath under this Constitution in accordance therewith. 118. (1) The institution of King or Ruler of a Kingdom or Constitutional Head, of a District, by whatever name called, existing immediately before the commencement of this Constitution under the law then in force, is hereby abolished. (2) Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, the immediately preceding clause shall have effect from 24th May, 1966, in relation to the Kingdom of Buganda. (3) Parliament may make provision for the payment of a pension, gratuity or other allowances to any of the persons 72

to whom clause (1) of this article applies and to such of their dependants as Parliament may prescribe. (4) Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, Parliament may make provision for the devolution of any property held by any person to whom clause (1) of this article applies by virtue of his office or by any other person or authority, being property connected with or attaching to the institution of King, Ruler or Constitutional Head. (5) No action may be instituted in any court of law in respect of any matter or claim by any person under this article or under any provision made by Parliament pursuant thereto. 119. (1) Where any matter or thing has been commenced
matters.

before the coming into force of this Constitution by any person or authority having power in that behalf under existing law, that matter or thing may be carried on and completed by the person or authority having power in that behalf on or after such commencement and, unless the President in any case otherwise directs it shall not be necessary for the latter person or authority to commence such matter or thing de novo. (2) This article shall have effect subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to any provision made by Parliament. 120. (1) All property, both movable and immovable, and Succession all assets which immediately before the commencement of toPr°Perty this Constitution were vested in any authority or person for the purposes of or in right of the Government of Uganda or in the Government of Uganda shall, on the commencement of this Constitution, vest in the Government of Uganda, subject to the provisions of Chapter XI of this Constitution. (2) Any property which was immediately before the commencement of this Constitution liable to escheat or be forfeited to any person or authority in right of the Government of Uganda shall on such commencement be liable to escheat or be forfeited to the Government of Uganda. (3) Where immediately before the commencement of this Constitution any person held any property or assets in trust for the President for the purposes or in the right of the Government of Uganda, that person shall from the commencement of this Constitution hold such property or assets on the like trust for the Government of Uganda.
77.

121. Where there is subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Constitution a contract which has been entered into by or on behalf of the Uganda Protectorate, Uganda, the Governor of the Uganda Protectorate, the Governor-General of Uganda or the Government of Uganda, then on and after such commencement all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Uganda Protectorate, Uganda, the Governor of the Uganda Protectorate, the Governor-General of Uganda or the Government of Uganda under the contract shall be vested in the Government of Uganda and the contract shall otherwise continue to be of full force and effect. 122. Subject to the provisions of articles 120 and 121, (a) any rights, prerogatives, powers, privileges or functions which were vested in the Crown in respect of Uganda under the law as it existed ' immediately before 9th October, 1963, and were exercisable by Her Majesty the Queen personally shall vest in the President who, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, shall have the power to do all things necessary for the exercise or performance thereof; (b) all other rights, prerogatives, powers, privileges or functions which were vested in the Crown in respect of Uganda under the law as it existed immediately before 9th October, 1963, shall vest in the Republic of Uganda. 123. (1) In the title of any criminal proceedings the prosecution shall be designated by the word "Uganda". (2) Civil proceedings by or against the Government of Uganda shall be instituted by or against the Attorney-General and all documents required to be served on the Government of Uganda for the purpose of or in connection with those proceedings shall be served on the Attorney-General. (3) Subject to the provisions of article 89 and of this article, legal proceedings pending immediately before the commencement of this Constitution before any court including civil proceedings by or against the Government shall not be affected by the commencement of this Constitution. (4) Notwithstanding any provision of Chapter III of this Constitution and any other law, no court shall make any decision or order or grant any remedy or relief in any proceedings instituted against the Government of Uganda or any person acting under the authority of the Government of

Uganda whether before or after the commencement of this Constitution in respect of, (a) any act or omission relating to, consequent upon or incidental to the suspension of the Constitution of October, 1962, or any part thereof or the establishment of the Constitution of April, 1966, together with any amendments to those Constitutions; or (b) anything done or omitted to be done for the purpose of maintaining public order or public security in any part of Uganda during the period between the 22nd day of February, 1966, and 'the commencement of this Constitution; or (c) any act or omission relating to, consequent upon or incidental to the administration of any Kingdom or District or the re-organization of the said administration including the creation or abolition of any office and the removal of any person from office in the government of a Kingdom or the administration of a District, during the period between the 22nd day of February, 1966, and the commencement of this Constitution; or (d) anything done or omitted to be done during, incidental to or consequent upon the state of public emergency declared on the 23rd day of May, 1966; or (e) any act or omission relating to or consequent upon the establishment of this Constitution. (5) For the purposes of paragraph (c) of the immediately preceding clause, the expression "office" includes membership of the Legislature of a Kingdom or a Council of a District. (6) Notwithstanding any provision of Chapter III of this Constitution, the Deportation (Validation) Act, 1966, shall have effect and shall not be questioned in any court.

A

i*jil

124. Notwithstanding any provision of the Constitution Validation then in force, any appointment made by the President or by meSsof1" any person with the authority of the President to the office of certain Saza Chief, Gombolola Chief, Muluka Chief or any other office in the government of the Kingdom of Buganda before the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to

have been a valid and effective appointment and any person so appointed to such office shall be deemed to have been lawfully appointed thereto. 125. Where, (a) any treaty, agreement or convention with any country or international organization was made or affirmed by Uganda or the Government of Uganda on or after the 9th October, 1962, and was still in force immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution; or (b) Uganda or the Government of Uganda was otherwise a party immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution to any such treaty, agreement or convention, the treaty, agreement or convention shall not be affected by the coming into force of this Constitution and Uganda or the Government of Uganda, as the case may be, shall continue to be a party thereto. 126. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the continuance in force of the system of mailo land tenure in the Districts of Bunyoro, East Mengo, Masaka, Mubende and West Mengo, immediately before the commencement of this. Constitution,, shall not be affected by such commencement. (2) The entire property in and control of all minerals and mineral ores in, under or upon, any lands or waters in any mailo land shall be vested in the Government of Uganda. (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression "mineral" includes, (a) metalliferous ores and other substances in their natural state which are obtainable only by mining or in the course of prospecting operations; (b) metalliferous ores and other substances in their natural state mined or obtained in the course of prospecting operations; (c) the valuable parts of such ores or other substances when unmanufactured; and (d) the product of treating or dressing such ores or such other substances for marketing or export. (4) For the purposes of the immediately preceding clause it is hereby declared that the expression "mineral"
7fi

shall not include clay, murram, sand, or any stone commonly used for building or similar purposes. (5) Parliament may make provision for regulating the estates and interests in and the transfer of mailo land. 127. (1) If the President is satisfied that there are more Compulsory
• retirement

local candidates qualified for appointment to or promotion in to facilitate any branch of the public service than there are vacancies aPP°intin any branch which could appropriately be filled by such iocai local candidates, he may select officers in that branch to whom candidates. this article applies and whose retirement would cause vacancies that could appropriately be filled by such suitably qualified local candidates as are available and fit for appointment and, by notice in writing, call upon the officers so selected to retire from the public service; and any officer who is so required to retire shall retire accordingly. (2) This article shall apply to, (a) any entitled officer as defined in the Schedule to the Uganda (Compensation and Retiring Benefits) Order in Council, 1962; and (b) any officer on probation who, if he had been confirmed in his appointment, would have been such an entitled officer. 128. (1) If any appropriate authority decides to give such Appeals concurrence as is required under clause (1) or (2) of article 107 in respect of any benefits to which that clause applies that may be granted or that have been granted to or in respect of an officer to whom this article applies, or if any such appropriate authority, makes any other decision the effect of which is, or might in the opinion of the appropriate authority be, that any such benefits cannot be granted ,to or in respect of such an officer, the appropriate authority shall cause to be delivered to the officer concerned or to his personal representatives, a written notice of the decision, stating the time, not being less than fourteen days from the date on which the notice is delivered, within which he or his personal representatives may apply to the appropriate authority for the case to be referred to an Appeals Board. (2) Any such decision of an appropriate authority shall not have effect until the expiry of the time stated in the notice and if application is duly made within that time for the case to be referred to an Appeals Board, the decision shall not have effect until the final determination of the case under

this article and except to the extent authorised by such determination : Provided that the appropriate authority may, pending the expiry of the time stated in the notice or pending the final determination of the case under this article, (a) suspend the payment of any benefits to which the decision that is the subject of the reference to the Appeals Board relates; and (b) suspend the officer concerned from the exercise of the functions of his office. (3) If application is duly made within the time stated in the notice for the case to be referred to an Appeals Board, the appropriate authority shall notify the President in writing of that application, and the President shall then appoint an Appeals Board of three members, consisting of, (a) one member selected by the President; t (b) one member selected by an association representative of public officers of which the applicant is qualified to be a member or representative of the profession of which the applicant is a member, the association being nominated in either case by the applicant; and (c) one member selected by the two other members jointly, or, in default of agreement between those members by the Judicial Service Commission, from among persons who hold or have held office as a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court, who shall be chairman. (4) The Appeals Board shall inquire into the facts of the case and for that purpose shall hear the applicant if he so requests in writing, and shall hear any other person who, in the opinion of the Board, is able to give the Board information on the case, and the Board shall have access to, and shall consider all documents that were available to the appropriate authority and shall also consider any further document relating to the case that may be produced by or on behalf of the applicant or the appropriate authority. (5) After the Appeals Board has completed its consideration of the case, the Board shall advise the appropriate authority whether the decision of the appropriate authority

that is the subject of the reference to the Board should be confirmed, reversed or modified and the appropriate authority shall act in accordance with such advice: Provided that where in any case the decision of the appropriate authority is that the applicant should be dismissed, the Board shall not have power to advise the appropriate authority to reverse or modify the decision, but shall have the power to grant to the applicant all or part of the pension or other like benefit, (a) for which he would have been eligible under any law if he had retired voluntarily at the date of his dismissal; or (b) in the case of an applicant who would not have been eligible for the grant of a pension if he had so retired, which could have been granted to him under any law if his service had been terminated in the public interest at the date of his dismissal, and the provisions of that law shall have effect accordingly. (6) Where power to remove the holder of an office from his office is vested by this Constitution in some person or authority other than an appropriate authority, then, in relation to any officer to whom this article applies and who holds such an office, this article shall have effect as if for the reference to a decision of an appropriate authority the effect of which is that any benefits cannot be granted to or in respect of that officer there were substituted a reference to a decision having that effect taken by that person or authority. (7) This article shall apply to any officer whose conditions of service include an entitlement to free passages from East Africa for the purpose of leave of absence upon the completion of a tour of duty and who is the substantive holder of a pensionable office in the public service. (8) For the purpose of this article, the expression "appropriate authority" has the same meaning as in article 107. 129. Pursuant to the provisions of article 145 of the Con- Cessation of stitution of 15th April, 1966, it is hereby declared that the Jj?£|g tion Constitution in force immediately before the commencement 1966. of this Constitution shall cease to have effect from the commencement of this Constitution.

78

130. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, "Act of Parliament" means any law made by Parliament; "Armed Forces of Uganda" means the Uganda Military Forces for which provision is made by Parliament and any other Armed Forces of Uganda for which provision is so made; "article" means an article of this Constitution; "Commonwealth" includes any independent country of the Commonwealth and any dependency of any such country, and the Republic of Ireland; "Court of Appeal" has the meaning assigned to it by clause (6) of article 89; "District" means a District referred to in article 80; "financial year" means the.period of twelve months ending on the thirtieth day of June in any year or such other day as Parliament may prescribe; "functions" includes powers and duties; "Gazette" means the Uganda Gazette including any supplement thereof; "High Court" means the High Court of Uganda; "Minister" includes the President, the Vice-President, a Minister, the Attorney-General and a Deputy Minister of the Government of Uganda; "Municipal Council" means the council of a municipality in Uganda established by law; "National Assembly" means the National Assembly of Uganda; "oath" includes affirmation; "oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by law; "Parliament" means the Parliament of Uganda; "President" means the President of Uganda; "public office" means an office in the public service; "public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office; "public service" means, subject to the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, service in any civil capacity of the Government of Uganda, any District Administration or Urban Authority; 80

"session" means the sittings of the National Assembly beginning when it first meets after the prorogation or dissolution of Parliament at any time and ending when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued; "sitting" means a period during which the National Assembly is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee; "Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly and "Deputy Speaker" shall be construed accordingly; "teacher" means a person who regularly instructs persons in a school other than a person who gives only religious instruction; "Uganda" means the Republic of Uganda; "Urban Authority" means a city, municipal or town council or town board established by law. (2), In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, references to offices in the public service shall be construed as including references to the offices of judges of the High Court and references to the offices of members of all other courts of law established by Parliament, other than courtsmartial, being offices the emoluments attaching to which are paid directly out of moneys provided by Parliament, and references to the offices of members of the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service and of teachers in the public service. (3) In this Constitution, references to an office in the public service shall not be construed as including references to the office of the President, the Vice-President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, a Minister or a Deputy Minister, the Attorney-General, a member of the Assembly or a member of any Commission established by this Constitution. (4) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a reference to the holder of an office by the term designating his office shall be construed as including a reference to any person for the time being lawfully acting in or performing the functions of that office. (5) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding a public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service under the Government of Uganda. 81

(6) References in this Constitution to the power to remove a public officer from his office shall be construed as including references to any power conferred by any law to require or permit that officer to retire from the public service: Provided that, (a) nothing in this clause shall be construed as conferring on any person or authority power to require a judge of the High Court or of the Court of Appeal, the Auditor-General or the InspectorGeneral of Police, to retire from the public service; and (b) any power conferred by any law to permit a person to retire from the public service shall, in the case of any public officer who may be removed from office by some person or authority other than a Commission established by this Constitution, vest in the President. (7) Any provision in this Constitution that vests in any person or authority power to remove any public officer from his office shall be without prejudice to the power of any person or authority to abolish any office or to any law providing for the compulsory retirement of public officers generally or any class of public officer on attaining an age specified therein. (8) Where power is vested by this Constitution in any person or authority to appoint any person to act in or perform the functions of any office if the holder thereof is himself unable to perform those functions, no such appointment shall be called in question on the ground that the holder of the office was not unable to perform those functions. (9) Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any statutory instrument or rule, or pass any resolution, or give any direction, the power shall be construed as including the power, exercisable in like manner, to amend or revoke any such statutory instrument, rule, resolution or direction. (10) In this Constitution references to the alteration of any of the provisions of this Constitution or any Act of Parliament include references to the amendment, modification or re-enactment, with or without amendment or modification, of that provision, the suspension or repeal of that provision and the making of different provision in lieu of that provision.

SCHEDULES.
SCHEDULE 1. THE BOUNDARY O F UGANDA. Article 2 (2).

Commencing at the highest point of Mt. Sabinio; thence in a northeasterly direction to the southern extremity of the Mdagana ridge marked by Boundary Pillar 1; thence along the watershed of Mdagana to its highest point, marked by BP 2; thence in a north-westerly direction in a straight line to the summit,of the knoll Chieshire, marked by BP 3; thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to the confluence of the Rivers Nyarugando and Nkanka (Kanga); thence following the thalweg of the River Nyarugando to its source; thence in a straight line in a north-westerly direction to the highest point of the hill Giskio, marked by BP 4; thence following the watershed between the hill Giskio and the hill Lubona and its continuation as far as a point, marked by BP 5, about 400 metres north-west of the summit of the hill Lubona; thence along the crest of the spur running in a north-westerly direction to the River Sinda (Lulangala); thence along the crest of the opposite spur, as shown on the map, to the summit of the hill Kirambo, marked by BP 6; thence in a curved line, as shown on the map, along the crest of a spur running from Kirambo in a north-easterly and northerly direction to the northernmost elbow of the River Kaku or Rutshuru; thence in a straight line across this river to the mouth of the stream Kasumo (Sumo); thence along the thalweg of this stream to its source; thence in a straight line to the lowest point, marked by BP 7 of the col north-east of the above-mentioned elbow of the River Kaku or Rutshuru; thence in a straight line to the confluence of the Rivers Kyarakibi and Murungu; thence following the thalweg of the River Murungu downstream to its junction with the thalweg of the River Chonga; thence in a straight line to the summit of a hill (Muko), marked by BP 8, about 700 metres north-north-east of this junction; thence in a straight line in a northerly direction to the summit of the hill Chikomo (Deko South) or Katwakare, marked by BP 9; thence in a straight line to the summit of the hill Deko North; thence in a straight line to the summit of a hill (Nteko) about 3 km north by west of Deko North; thence in a straight line to the point, marked by BP 10, where the Kayonsa road crosses the River Ivi; thence in a straight line to a point marked by BP 11, about 1 km to the north of BP 10, on a prominent spur of the Nkabwa-Salambo range; thence following the crest of this spur to the summit of the hill Salambo; thence along the watershed of the Nkabwa-Salambo range to the summit of the hill Nkabwa, marked by BP 12. From the summit of Nkabwa hill, the boundary runs in an easterly direction to the summit of the hill Kyeshero, marked by BP 12A; thence in the same straight line to the point known as Kakoraza, marked by BP 13; thence in the same straight line eastwards to the River Munyaga; thence along the thalweg of this river, downstream, to its junction with the thalweg pf the River Ishasha; thence- along the thalweg of the River Ishasha, downstream, to its mouth in Lake Edward; thence in a straight line in a northerly direction across Lake Edward to a point marked by BP 1 at the mouth of the River Lubilia-Chako; thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP 2; thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP 3; no

thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP 4; thence along the thalweg of this river to the point where it separates into the rivers Lubilia and Chako as marked by BP 5; thence along the thalweg of the River Chako to a point marked by BP 6; thence continuing along the thalweg of the River Chako, upstream, to its source at a point marked by BP 7; thence in a straight line to the highest point of the Ruwenzori Range, the summit of Margharita Peak; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Lami, situated about 5.4 km northwest of the Peak Kalengili and about 20 km south-west of the hill-top Karangora;" thence along the thalweg of River Lamia, downstream, to its junction with the thalweg of the River Semliki; thence along the thalweg of the River Semliki, downstream, to its mouth in Lake Albert; thence across Lake Albert in a succession of straight lines passing through the points situated mid-way between the shores of the lake on parallels of 01° 31', 01° 45' and 02° 00' north latitude, to a point mid-way between the shores of the lake on the parallel of 02° 07' north latitude. From this point the boundary runs in a northerly direction along the meridian for a distance of approximately 4.5 km north of the point on the parallel of 02° 07' north latitude; thence in a straight line to a point marked by BP 1 on the shore of Lake Albert and on the prolongation of a straight line from the hill Kagudi (Uduka) to the knoll Marombe on the escarpment overlooking Lake Albert about 1.7 km south-east by east of the hill Kagudi, and is about 100 metres from the lakeshore on the said straight line; thence in a straight line to BP 2 on the hill Marombe, about 2 km from the lakeshore; thence in a straight line to BP 3, on the summit of the hill Kagudi (Uduka); thence in a straight line to BP 4 on the neck of the hill Ngumuda and on a straight line from the hill Kagudi to the summit of the hill Biet (Otal), which is about 1.04 km from the hill Kagudi; thence in a straight line to BP 5 on the hill Biet (Otal), at a distance of 3.04 km from the hill Kagudi; thence in a straight line to BP 6 on the hill Virkidi on a straight line from the hill Kagudi to the hill Biet at a distance of about 4.8 km from Kagudi; thence in a straight line to BP 7 at the intersection of a straight line from the hill Kagudi to the hill Biet and a straight line from the hill Milia to the junction of the Rivers Nashiodo and Alala, close to the River Otal on its left bank and is known as Utal; thence in a northerly direction along the meridian of BP 7 on a straight line from the hill Milia to the junction of the Rivers Nashiodo and Alala to BP 8 about 4 km from the junction of the said rivers on the hill Wellingondo; thence along the meridian to BP 9 on the hill Nyatabu (Niatabu), about 2.48 km from the junction of the said rivers; thence along the meridian to BP 10 on the hill Nyatabu II (Niatabu) about. 1.2 km from the junction of the said rivers in one of the villages known as Parombo; thence along the meridian to BP 11 on the right bank of the river Nashiodo (Achodo) at its junction with the river Alala; thence along the thalweg of the river upstream to its source to BP 12 on the summit of the hill Keresi; thence along a curved line following the watershed of the river Sido basin to BP 13 on the summit of the hill Aminzi; thence in a straight line to BP 14 on the summit of the hill Kiti in a straight line from the hill Aminzi to Monda (Omunda) Rock at a distance of about 2 km from Aminzi; thence in a straight line to BP 15 on the east immediately below the summit of the rock

Monda; thence in a straight line to BP 16 on the right bank of the River Niabola (Nyibola) about 15 feet above its junction with the rivers Nyarwodo (Narodo) and Niabola (Nyibola); thence along the thalweg of the river Niabola (Nyibola) to BP 17 upon the summit of the hill Agu; thence along a curved line following the watershed of the river Aioda (Ayuda) basin on BP 18 on the summit of the hill Asina about 3.44 km south-west by south from the hill Agu; thence along the watershed to BP 19 on the summit of the hill Sisi; thence along a curved line following the watershed of the river Leda to BP 20 on the summit of the hill Ajigu; at a distance of about 2.56 km northwest by west of the hill Sisi; thence along a curved line following the watershed of the river Leda basin to BP 21, at a point 2.16 km west of BP 20; thence along a curved line following the watershed to BP 22 on the knoll Okiyo situated about 4.2 km south-east by east of the summit of the hill Cho; thence along a curved line to BP 23 on a small group of rocks (Matijo) upon the watershed between the river Niagak basin and that tributary which joins the Niagak just below the confluence of the rivers Niagak and Amoda and is about 2 km south-east by east of the hill Cho; thence along a curved line to BP 24 on a small knoll on the above described watershed at a distance of about 200 metres from the confluence of the rivers Niagak and Amoda; thence in a straight line to BP 25 on the right bank of the river Amoda (Ammodar), immediately above its confluence with the river Nyalidha, at a point about 1,600 metres south-west of the summit of the hill Akar; thence along the thalweg of the river Nyalidha to BP 26 upon the Nile-Congo watershed about 6.2 km west-south-west of the summit of the hill Akar and about 5.6 km south-south-east of the hill Utzi, close to the source of the river Omithameri. From this point the boundary follows the Nile-Congo watershed in a northerly direction to a point about 0.3 km south of the source of the river Kaia (Kaya) the tri-junction of the Uganda/Congo/Sudan International Boundaries; thence in a straight line to the source of the river Kaia (Kaya); thence along the thalweg of the river Kaia (Kaya), downstream to its confluence with the unnamed river which runs immediately south of Chei and Lodwa rocks, and then runs in a northerly direction; thence in an easterly direction in a straight line to a point on the western summit of the hill Kirwa, marked by a surface beacon; thence in a south-easterly direction in a straight line to the confluence of the rivers Adjika and Khor Nyaura (Nyawa); thence in a north-easterly direction in a straight line to a point on the top of J. Jalei, marked by a surface beacon; thence in an easterly direction to the source of the river Khor Kayo (Kayu), approximately f miles from J. Jalei; thence following the thalweg of the Khor Kayo to a point on the thalweg directly opposite the westernmost point of the foothills of the escarpment running north-west from Jebel Elengua; thence in a straight line to the westernmost point of the foothills; thence following . the bottom of the foothills of this escarpment in a south-easterly, or such a line as shall exclude the riverain people below Nimule; thence following due east to the intersection of the thalweg of the river Bahr el Jebel (White Nile) with the thalweg of the river Unyama; thence along the thalweg of the river Unyama, upstream, to a point on the thalweg along the latitude of Jebel Ebijo; thence following due east to the summit of Jebel Ebijo; thence following in the direction of Jebel Kakomera to the thalweg of the river Achwa;

84

85

thence following the thalweg of the river Achwa, downstream, to the intersection of the thalweg and a straight line towards the village Lokai to the northernmost point of the bottom of Jebel Marokho; thence following the summit of Jebel Agu; thence following the summit of Jebel Ilala (Lomwaka); thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to the hill (Jebel) Modole; thence following a straight line in a south-easterly direction to the most south-easterly foothills of Jebel Tereteinia; thence in a straight line in a south-easterly direction to a point on the summit of the hill (Jebel) Lonyili marked by a triangulation mark 9.Y.2; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 58,506 feet approximately to triangulation mark 9.Y.9; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 17,831 feet approximately to a triangulation mark 9.Y.8; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 26,945 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.6; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 17,854 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.5; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 7,320 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.4; thence on bearing 44° 45' for a distance of 6,420 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.3; thence on bearing 44° 45' and for a distance of 20,306 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.1 on the summit of the hill (Jebel) Urungo; thence on bearing 44° 45' to a point north of Mount Zulia at a distance of 31.5 miles approximately from 9.Y.1 and which is to the tri-junction of the Uganda/Sudan/Kenya International Boundaries. From this point the boundary is defined by a series of Boundary Pillars joined by straight lines as follows; on an approximate bearing of 127° for an approximate distance of 21,500 ft. to Pillar UK 180; thence on a bearing of 132° 41' for a distance of 4,444ft. to Pillar UK 179; 151° 51' 14,674ft. 178; 217° 9,935ft. 177; 153° 39' 11,091ft. 176; 116° 35' 6,799ft. 175; 153° 08' 9,457ft. 174; 180° 05' 5,313ft. 173; 193° 47' 3,942ft. • 172; 252° 36' 11,338ft. 171; 175° 13' 6,533ft. 170; 108° 18' 7,280ft. 169; 136° 07' 12,882ft. 168; 118° 30' 12,368ft. 167; 184° 26' 1,847ft. 166; 193° 32' 8,426ft. 165; 195° 43' 12,045ft. 164; 208° 42' 606ft. 163; 225° 39' 1.958ft. 162; 244° 44' 4,290ft. 161; 244° 37' 5,256ft. 160; 186° 44' 7,960ft. 159; 185° 09' 797ft. 158; 141° 19' 224ft. 157; 105° 28' 1,390ft. 156; 62° 15' 6,590ft. 155; 79° 18' 6,628ft. 154; 79° 24' 562ft. 153; 98° 30' 7,857ft. 152;

thence on a bearing of 86° 30' for a distance of 6,719ft. to Pillar UK 151 19° 35' 2,151ft. 150 54° 05' 1,326ft. 149 52° 46' 1,387ft. 148 84° 15' 7,907ft. 147 88° 38' 2,969ft. 146 93° 11' 3,880ft. 145 162° 13' 10,907ft. 144 169° 22' 1,233ft. 143 180° 05' 6,988ft. 142 276° 03' 4,216ft. 141 269° 35' 12,526ft. 140 220° 56' 4,826ft. 139 213° 23' 4,857ft. 138 244° 58' 2,355ft. 137 262°'40' 1,631ft. 136: 176° 51' 2,685ft. 135 71° 53' 2,157ft. 134 141° 01' 1,898ft. 133 73° 20' 2,90,0ft. 132 95° 51' 1,882ft. 131 107° 02' 5,231ft. 130 193° 16' 1,233ft. 129 164° 54' 3,325ft. 128 249° 32' 2,213ft. 127 248° 20' 5,751ft. 126 257° 52' 1,900ft. 125 131° 49' 3,476ft. 124 72° 43' 4,611ft. 123 81° 33' 1,335ft. 122 69° 56' 6,268ft. 121 68° 27' 4,067ft. 120 68° 08' 2,676ft. 119 108° 26' 1,514ft. 118 120° 39' 591ft. 117 174° 30' 1,137ft. 116 177° 54' 1,945ft. 115 73° 00' 766ft. 114 29° 30' 2,694ft. 113 79° 44' 907ft. 112 66° 16' 1,937ft. Ill 79° 55' 2,194ft. 110 145° 27' 8,509ft. 109 156° 21' 6,769ft. 108 135° 26' 8,205ft. 107 125° 22' 6,438ft. 106 129° 06' 5,399ft. 105 187° 04' 4,979ft. 104 190° 48' 3,490ft. 103 206° 19' 1,348ft. 102 90° 43' 989ft. 101 19° 19' 13,434ft. 100 43° 44' 3,513ft. 99 72° 50' 4,525ft. 98 87

86

thence on a bearing of 77° 44' for a distance of 6,713ft. to Pillar UK 9791° 40' 5,820ft 96;' 119° 12' 3,050ft. 95; 137° 48' 9,847ft. 94; 138= 59' 2,497ft. 93; 166° 14' 4,695ft. 208° 52' 92; 5,792ft. 109° 54' 91; 13,971ft. 130° 36' 90; 3,998ft. 189° 05' 89; 11,610ft. 190° 53' 88; 9,774ft. 173° 59' 87; 11,720ft. 185° 18' 86; 3,718ft. 185° 17' 85; 8,946ft. 185° 17' 84; 9,408ft. 214° 56' 83; 3,320ft. 223° 42' 82; 6,391ft. 234° 33' 81; 4,606ft. 264° 01' 80; 9,781ft. 305° 56' 79; 2,607ft. 254° 05' 78B; 658ft. 166° 43' 78A; 3,498ft. 7 135° 44' 7,662ft. 147° 08' 77; 7,410ft. 171° 43' 76; 6,334ft. 212° W 75; 6,726ft. 249° 27' 74; 3,158ft. 181° 55' 73; 13,506ft. 170° 05' 72; 2,587ft. 129° 00' 71; 5,641ft. 137° 01' 70; 8,709ft. 165° 27' 69; 13,939ft. 159° 01' 68; 9,269ft. 174° 59' 67; 14,818ft. 179° 35' 66; 5,101ft. 172° 44' 65; 9,833ft. 178° 53' 64; 6,324ft. 148° 52' 63; 3,609ft. 98° 07' 62; 3,818ft. 124° 01' 61; 5,022ft. 122° 27' 60; 284ft. 147° 13' 59; 4,281ft. 157° 07' 58; 5,115ft. 66° 06' 57; 6,710ft. 107° 46' 9,418ft. 56; 117° 32' 4,055ft. 55; 151° 38' 10,044ft. 54; 131° 09' 6,896ft. 53; 171° 33' 7,589ft. 52; 185° 03' 3,500ft. 51; 181° 55' 6,136ft. 50; 177° 35' 11,141ft. 49; 156° 20' 4,169ft. 48; 142° 05' 3,944ft. 47; 46;

2'

f

thence on a bearing of 175° 32'for <i distance of 7,091ft. to Pillar U K 45; 44; 21,063ft. 170° 00' 13,232ft. 43; 112° 4.0' 3,082ft. 42; 119° 36' 41; 160° 39' 14,972ft. 5,819ft. 40; 105° 33' 6,099ft. 39; 87° 07' 2,741ft. 38; 98° 58' 37; 6,258ft. 32° 32' 2,826ft. 36; 120° 25' 3,252ft. 35; 157° 06' 3,665ft. 34; 113° 29' 2,097ft. 33; 106° 38' 1,927ft. 32; 109° 05' 2,032ft. 31; 119° 28' 30; ' 154° 27' 4,336ft. 29; 156° 37 7,396ft. 28; 74° 05' 4,234ft. 27; 140° 39' 3,143ft. 26; 1,522ft. 159° 12' 1,137ft. 25; 159° 02' ••• ,,, 6,582ft. 162° 28' 24; 164° 56' 11,085ft. 23; , <#?: 173° 19' 6,900ft. 22; 181° 26' 2,542ft. 21; 3,58Qft. 191° 10' 20; 190° 36' 12,898ft. 19; 133° 27' 7,521ft. 18; 161° 49' 6,006ft. 17; 16; 4,634ft. 162° 32' 136° 59' 17,307ft. 15; 14; 157° 19' 6,478ft. 145° 56' 9,097ft. 13; 128° 23' 7,482ft. 12; 3,788ft. 79° 21' 11; 6° 50' 6,123ft. 10; 75° 11' 5,044ft. 9; 144° 31' 2,289ft. 8; 169° 05' 14,429ft. 7; 165° 40' 12,000ft. 6; 92° 56' 7,352ft. 5; 160° 24' 1,785ft. 4; 4,482ft. 167° 20' 3; 10,395ft. 158° 00' 2; 2,112ft. 86° 07' 1, situated on the east bank of the River Kanamuton at Map Reference Y T 1773 (Sheet NA-36- 8); thence following a straight line up the centre to the top of the Dass known as Karamuroi (Suk) or Karithakol (Karamojong); thence southerly following a straight line to the hillock called Lokula; thence south-easterly following a straight line to a beacon at the highest point of the ridge known as Kariemakaris; thence continuing following a straight line, still southerly, to the foot of the western spur of the hill known as Aoruma, and following the foot of that spur to a beacon; thence in a generally southerly direction following

88

89

straight lines to the westernmost end of the small hillock known as Lewi Lewi, to the hillock known as Sumemerr (known, to the Suk as Sumaremar) to the hillock Morumeri, to the hill known as Kauluk, across the Kanyangareng River to Nongalitaba Hill, across the Kunyao River to the small hillock known as Lokwamor, to the hillock known as Kokas, to Korkurao Hill; thence to Sagat Hill and along the highest points of the rocky ridge (forming a continuation of Mount Riwa and known collectively by the Karamojong as Kogipie) known severally as Sagat (Karamojong) or Kogipie (Suk), Moruebu and Karenyang; thence to the summit of the hill Muregogoi; thence following a straight line to the source of the river Maragat; thence by the centre of the River Maragat to its confluence with the river Maron; thence south-westerly by the foot of the north-western slopes of Kassauria Hill to the western extremity of that hill; thence following a straight line south-easterly to the northeastern extremity of Mount Riwa; thence following the foot of the eastern portion of Mount Riwa to the source of the Kanyerus River (marked by a large tree); thence south-easterly following a line of cairns, approximately in a straight line to the confluence of the River Bukwa (Kibukwa) with the River Suam (Swam); thence following the thalweg of the River Suam, upstream, to the point where the more north-westerly of the two streams forming the River Suam (Swam) or Turkwell emerges from the crator of Mount Elgon; thence following a straight line south-westerly to the highest point of Mount Elgon (Sudek). From this point, the boundary continues following a straight line in a north-westerly direction to the Wagagai summit of Mount Elgon; thence following a straight line, south-westerly, to the source of the River Malaba (also known as the Lwakaka or Lwagaga); thence following the thalweg of the River Malaba to its intersection with the eastern side of the Majanji-Busia-Tororo road at Map Reference XR 276S (Sheet NA-36-15); thence in a south-westerly direction following a line on the east side of and 100 feet distant from and parallel to the centre line of the said road to its intersection with the River Okame at Map Reference XR 2458 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence upstream following the thalweg of the River Okame to its confluence with the River Alupe; thence upstream following the thalweg of the River Alupe to a point at Map Reference XR 2453 (Sheet NA-36-15) marked by a boundary cairn; thence following successively in a south-westerly direction, a number of boundary cairns at distances from each other of 550 feet, 1226 feet, 959 feet, 976 feet, 1007 feet, 580 feet, 1512 feet, 463 feet, 2364 feet (on the northern side of the main Busia-Mumias road) and 1436 feet at the source of the River Sango at Map Reference XR 2251 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence downstream following the thalweg of the River Sango to its confluence with the River Sio; thence following the thalweg of the River Sio to its mouth in Lake Victoria. From this point, the boundary continues following a straight line southwesterly to the most northerly point of Sumba Island; thence by the western and south-western shores of that island to its most southerly point; thence following a straight line south-easterly to the most westerly point of Mageta Island; thence following a straight line, still southerly, to the most western point of Kiringiti Island; thence following a straight line southerly to the most westerly point of Uemba Island; thence following a straight line southerly to the westernmost point of Pyramid Island; thence following a straight line due south to a point on latitude 01°00'S.

From this point the boundary continues following the 01°00'S parallel to the western shore of Lake Victoria; thence following the boundary pillars already erected along the 01°00'S as far as the second crossing of this line by the River Kagera, between boundary pillars Nos. 27 and 26; thence following the thalweg of the River Kagera, upstream, to its confluence with the River Kakitumba; thence following the thalweg of the River Kakitumba, upstream, to its confluence with the River Chizinga; thence following the River Chizinga, upstream, to the source of its southwestern branch marked by BP 38, and continuing along the thalweg in a south-westerly direction to BP 37 on the saddle between the hills Mavari and Kitoff; thence north-westerly in a straight line to a direction pillar on a knoll at the foot of the easterly spur of Kitoff; thence in a straight line along the easterly spur of Kitoff to a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar on the south-easterly spur of Kitoff; thence in a straight line to BP 36 on the prominent southerly spur of Kitoff; thence continuing around the slopes of the hill Kitoff marked by direction pillars to BP 35 and by direction pillars along the westerly spur of Kitoff and in a series of straight lines to BP 34; thence continuing to BPs 33 and 32 along the eastern slopes of the Mashuri range marked at each change of direction by a direction pillar as far as BP 31 on a conspicuous small hill; thence in a straight line in a south-easterly direction to another conspicuous small hill marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line across the River Muvumba to the southern summit of the hill Ndega (Mbega) marked by BP 30; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar in the valley between the hills Ndega and Kivisa; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar on the northern spur of the hill Kivisa; thence along the spur of this hill to its summit marked by BP 29; thence continuing along a very conspicuous water parting to the top of the hill Magumbizi marked by BP 28; thence along a line marked by direction pillars following the long easterly spur of the hill Nebishagara to its summit marked by BP 27; thence along the crest of the conspicuous western spur to a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar on a conspicuous knoll in the valley; thence along the crest of a spur leading south-west and south to the summit of the hill Kitanga marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to the summit of the conspicuous small hill Nyakara marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line marked by a direction pillar in the valley to BP 26 on the northern crest of the hill Kavimbiri; thence along the crest in a southerly direction to the top of Kavimbiri marked by BP 25; thence along the crest of this hill in a north-westerly direction, marked by direction pillars to BP 24; thence down the crest of a prominent spur to BP 23 at its foot, as more particularly delineated on Uganda 1/50,000 sheet 94/3 (Series Y 732). The boundary then crosses the Kamuganguzi or Murinda swamp and follows the thalweg of the Kiruruma swamp to a direction pillar at the edge of that swamp and thence to BP 22 on a conspicuous knoll; thence in a west-south-westerly direction marked by direction pillars along the spur of the hill Kisivo to its summit marked by BP 21; thence in a straight line to BP 20 in the valley east of the hill Sanja; thence in a straight line to the top of the hill Sanja marked by BP 19; thence in a straight line to the top of the hill Akasiru marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to BP 18 which is situated 4 km north-west of the summit of the hill Gwassa; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Kiruruma marked by BP 17; thence following the thalweg of the River Kiruruma (Vigaga) downstream to BP 16 at its confluence with the River Mugera

90

91

(Narugwambu); thence in straight line due west marked by a direction pillar to BP IS; thence along the crest of the Vugamba range by direction pillar to BP 14 on the hill Maberemere; thence by direction pillars to BP 13 on the most northerly point of the range; thence by direction pillars to the hill Kanyaminyenya marked by BP 12; thence continuing along the crest of the Vugamba range to its southern summit marked by BP 11; thence in a straight line to BP 10 on the top of the hill Lugendabare; thence in a straight line to BP 9 on the hill Namujera; thence in a curved line marked by BPs 8, 7, 6, 5 and 4 to the summit of the hill Musonga (East) marked by BP 3 as more particularly delineated on Uganda 1/50,000 sheet 93/4 (Series Y 732). The boundary continues along the crest of this hill in a south-westerly direction marked by a direction pillar to BP 2 situated between the hills Nyarubebsa and Musongo and on the track leading southwards; thence to the summit of the hill Nyarubebsa marked by a direction pillar; thence in a south-westerly direction along the spur referred to as the Mulemule-Musongo spur to the highest point of Muhavura; thence along the watershed from the highest point of Muhavura to the highest point of Mgahinga; thence in a westerly direction to BP 1 on the north-south track running between Mgahinga and Sabinio; thence along the watershed to the highest point of Mount Sabinio the point of commencement. SCHEDULE 2. T H E BOUNDARIES O F D I S T R I C T S O F UGANDA.
DISTRICT OF ACHOLI.

Oromo upstream to its source; thence in a westerly direction in a straight line to the source of the River Akoyo; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Laminalenga; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Gorduru; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Amon; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Laminoduru; thence in a straight line to the summit of the hill Opit; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Onekogwok; thence following the thalweg of the River Onekogwok downstream to its confluence with the River Minakulu; thence following the River Minakulu upstream in a westerly direction to its junction with the River Abuta; thence following the thalweg of the River Abuta to its source; thence in a straight line in a south-westerly direction to the source of the River Juma; thence following the thalweg of the River Juma to its junction with the Victoria Nile; thence following the boundary of the District of Bunyoro westwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF ANKOLE.

Commencing at the point opposite Mahagi Port where the boundary of the District of Bunyoro meets the Uganda/Congo boundary; thence following the West Nile District boundary northwards along the River Nile to the mouth of the River Choro; thence following the Madi District boundary eastwards and northwards to the Uganda/Sudan boundary; thence following the Uganda/Sudan boundary eastwards to the summit of Mount Lonyili; thence in a straight line south-eastwards to the summit of Mount Kaleri; thence in a straight line south-eastwards to the source of the River Logelat (the approximate position of which is latitude 3° 3 3 ' north and longitude 33° 39' east); thence following the thalweg of the Rivers Logelat, Chapeth and Chapedi downstream to a point due north of the summit of the hill Obworo; thence in a straight line to the summit of the hill Obworo; thence in a straight line southwards to the most northerly point of the Napono range of hills (the approximate position of which is latitude 3° 00' north and longitude 33° 34' east); thence following the crest of the said range to its most southerly point (the approximate position of which is latitude 2° 5 1 ' north and longitude 33° 36' east); thence due south to the River Awach; thence following the thalweg of the River Awach downstream to its junction with the River Agago; thence following the thalweg of that river downstream to its junction with the Orama River; thence following the latter to its source marked by a cairn; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Loker at a waterhole named Ceke marked by a cairn; thence downstream to its junction with the Atababaa River marked by a cairn; thence in a straight line to the junction of the Ayika and Ongaro rivers marked by a cairn; thence in a straight line to the waterhole Acolpi marked by a cairn; thence following the River Lauma downstream to the River Moroto (Aswa); thence following the thalweg of the River Moroto downstream to its junction with the River Oromo; thence following the thalweg of the River

Commencing at the mouth of the Kazinga Channel in Lake Edward; thence following the Toro District boundary eastwards to its junction with the boundary of the District of Masaka; thence following the boundary of the District of Masaka southwards to its junction with the Uganda/Tanzania boundary; thence following the Uganda/ Tanzania boundary westwards to its junction with the Rwanda/ Tanzania boundary; thence following the Uganda/Rwanda boundary to its junction with the River Batoko; thence due westwards to the crest of the Burama Hills; thence following the crest of the Burama Hills and the crest of the Rugongo Hills, to Kyiteizhura (close to Lutobo); thence in a north-westerly direction following the crest of the ridge leading up to the Nyarubare Hills to the highest point known as Nyaruwari; thence due northwards to meet the River Rwamutungo; thence following the thalweg of the River Rwamutungo into the River Ikona; thence following the River Ikona into the River Nyarurambi; thence following the thalweg of that river into the River Omurkango; thence following the thalweg of that river to its junction with the River Kahengye; thence following the thalweg of the River Kahengye into the River Mugoya; and thence to its confluence with the River Nyamugoya; thence following the thalweg of the River Nyamugoya upstream to its source (near Rwanzha); thence in a straight line northwards to the source of the River Nyachera; thence following the thalweg of the River Nyachera to its junction with the River Rushaya; thence following the thalweg of the River Rushaya to the southernmost corner of the Maramagambo Forest (at the confluence of the Rushaya and Kyomela rivers); thence following the eastern edge of the Maramagambo Forest to the point on the north-eastern edge of which the River Kaizi enters the forest; thence following the thalweg of the River Kaizi to its mouth in Lake Edward; thence in a straight line to the point on the Uganda/Congo boundary of which the latitude is 0°20' south; thence following the Uganda/Congo boundary northwards to its junction with the Toro boundary; thence following the Toro boundary eastwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF BUGISU.

Commencing at the point where the River Siroko enters Lake Okolitorom; thence following the Teso District boundary southwards and then westwards to the junction of the Rivers Lwere and Kolonyi; thence follow^ ing the thalweg of the River Kolonyi to its source; thence in a straight 93

92

line southwards to the source of the River Kawejani; thence following the thalweg of the River Kawejani to its junction with the Rivers Namatala and Nambale; thence following the thalweg of the River Nambale upstream as far as the track which was the old Mbale-Mazimasa road; thence along that track to the point where it crosses the Kakekere River; thence in a straight line southwards to the railway bridge crossing the Manafwa River; thence following the railway line southwards to a bend where it is crossed by a track from Busiu to Kangalaba school; thence in a straight line south-westwards to the junction of the River Kimutu and the Kidoko and Nangipa swamp rivers; thence following the thalweg of the Kidoko upstream to its source; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Kochili; thence following that river southwards to its junction with the River Osenya; thence following the Osenya and Aderema Rivers eastwards upstream to its source; thence in a straight line to the water hole on the Akaniningata River about 700 yards upstream of its junction with the Derema River; thence in a straight line to the source of the Komiria River; thence following that river to meet the Uganda/Kenya boundary; thence following the Uganda/Kenya boundary north-eastwards to its junction with the Sebei District boundary; thence following the Sebei District boundary north-westwards to its junction with the Karamoja District boundary; thence following the Karamoja District boundary westwards to its junction with the Teso District boundary; thence following the Teso District boundary southwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF BUKEDI.

of East Mengo and Mubende, to the thalweg of the River Muzizi at the southernmost corner of Buyaga Block 333; thence following the southern and/or western boundaries of Buyaga Blocks 333, 331 and 329 to its southwestern corner; thence north-westerly along the north bank of the River Muzizi to the coast of Lake Albert at longitude 30° 33' east; thence due north to meet the Uganda/Congo boundary; thence following the Uganda/ Congo boundary in a generally north-easterly direction to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF BUSOGA.

Commencing at the trijunctional point of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania in Lake Victoria; thence due west following the Uganda/ Tanzania boundary to its junction with the boundary of the District of East Mengo; thence northwards following the boundary of the District of East Mengo to its junction with the boundary of Lango District; thence eastwards following" the Lango District boundary to its junction with the boundary of Teso District; thence eastwards following the boundary of the District of Teso to its junction with the boundary of Bukedi District; thence south-eastwards following the boundary of Bukedi District to its junction with the Uganda/Kenya boundary; thence southwards following the Uganda/Kenya boundary to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF EAST M E N G O .

Commencing at a point where the Bugisu District boundary meets the Uganda/Kenya boundary; thence following the Uganda/Kenya boundary southwards into Berkeley Bay to a point the latitude of which is 0° 11' 30" north; thence north-westwards to the centre of the mouth of the Nalioba River; thence following the thalweg of the Nalioba River upstream to its source; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Namaingo; thence following the thalweg of the River Namaingo northeastwards to its junction with the Maingo River; thence following the thalweg of that river northwards into the River Lumbuku; thence following the thalweg of that river to where it meets the Sitambogo Local Forest Reserve; thence following the western boundary of that forest reserve; thence following the western boundary of the West Bugwe Local Forest Reserve to its junction with the River Malaba; thence following the thalweg of the River Malaba into the River Mpologoma; thence following the thalweg of the River Mpologoma into Lake Namasajeri (leaving Namasajeri Island to the west); thence across the lake northwards to meet the Teso District boundary; thence following the Teso District boundary eastwards to its junction with the Bugisu District boundary; thence following the Bugisu District boundary southwards and south-westwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF BUNYORO.

Commencing at the turning point opposite Mahagi Port on the Uganda/Congo boundary where that boundary turns from a due north to a north-westerly direction in Lake Albert; thence in a straight line to the most northerly mouth of the Victoria Nile in Lake Albert (known as the Pearson Channel); thence following the thalweg of the Victoria Nile in a, first, easterly, and then southerly, direction to its confluence with the River Kafu; thence westerly following successively the boundaries of the Districts

Commencing on the west bank of the River Nile at the site of the former Ripon Falls at Map Reference WR 2247 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence following the west bank of the River Nile into Lake Kyoga and thence along the centre of Lake Kyoga and again in a generally westerly direction along the centre of the River Nile as far as its confluence with the River Kafu; thence following the East Bank of the River Kafu to its junction with the River Mayanja; thence following the thalweg of the River Mayanja upstream to a point at Map Reference VR 1464 (Sheet N A - 3 6 14) being the confluence of the Rivers Mayanja Waswa and Mayanja Kato; thence following the thalweg of the River Mayanja Waswa upstream to its confluence with the River Danze at Map Reference VR 2159 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following the thalweg of the River Danze upstream in an easterly direction to a point at Map Reference VR 3663 (Sheet N A 36-14) being the western corner of Bulemezi Block 208; thence continuing in a generally easterly direction successively along the southern boundaries of Bulemezi Blocks 208, 207, 45, 40, 29, 28, 19, 15, 16, 22 and 3 to the western edge of the River Lwajali; thence easterly to the thalweg of the River Lwajali at Map Reference VR 6463 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following the thalweg of the River Lwajali upstream to its confluence with the River Nabangobe; thence following the thalweg of the River Nabangobe upstream to the point where it meets the northern boundary of Kyaddondo Block 180; thence in a southerly direction following the easterly boundaries of Kyaddondo Blocks 180, 184, 185, 224, 223, 225 and 226 to a point at Map Reference VR 6442 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following the thalweg of the River Bumbubumba downstream to the point where it meets Murchison Bay at Map Reference VR 6331 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following the centre line of Murchison Bay in a southerly and westerly direction to a point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VR 5718 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence due south to a point on the Equator in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VR 5700 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence in a straight line southwesterly to a point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VQ 4583 (Sheet

94

95

SA-36-2); thence due east to another point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VQ 8683 (Sheet SA-36-2); thence due south to the point in Lake Victoria where it meets the Uganda/Tanzania Boundary; thence following the Uganda/Tanzania Boundary to a point at Map Reference WP 4790 (Sheet SA-36-3); thence due north to a point at Map Reference WR 4724 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence in a northerly direction to the east of Yubwe Island into Hannington Bay; thence generally north-westwards to the north of Buvuma and Lingira Islands to the south of Kaivali, Maundu and Samoka Islands and into Napoleon Gulf; thence along the centre of Napoleon Gulf to the point of commencement at the site of the former Ripon Falls. These Boundaries are more particularly shown on Boundary Plan No. 268 deposited at the Survey Records Office, Department of Lands and Surveys, Entebbe.
DISTRICT OF KARAMOJA.

Commencing at the trijunctional point of the boundaries of Uganda, Sudan and Kenya; thence following the Uganda/Kenya boundary southwards to the source of the Kanyerus River; thence in a straight line to the summit of Kanyerus Hill below Mount Riwa; thence in a straight line to Lokales Hill; thence in a south-westerly direction until it meets jhe Alalam River; thence following the thalweg of the Alalam River to its junction with the Siti or Greek River; thence along the thalweg of the Greek River to a point due south of Kukumai Hill; thence in a straight line in a north-westerly direction to the junction of the Lokomo and Lororocho Rivers with the Kelim River; thence following the thalweg of the Kelim River to its point of entry into Lake Okolitorom; thence due westwards to a point the longitude of which is 34° 13' 30" east (in Lake Okolitorom); thence due north to a point the latitude of which is 01° 38' north; thence due west to a point which is due south of Ising (Thithing) rock; thence due north to Ising rock; thence in a straight line to Akisim Hill; thence in a straight line north-westwards in the direction of the summit of Otukei Hill until it crosses the River Kodokodoi; thence following the thalweg of that river south-westwards until it meets the Lango District boundary; thence following the Lango District boundary northwards until it meets the Acholi District boundary; thence following the Acholi District boundary northwards until it meets the Uganda/Sudan boundary; thence following the Uganda/Sudan boundary to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF K I G E Z I .

Commencing at the point on the Uganda/Congo boundary the latitude of which is 00° 20' south; thence following the boundary of the District of Ankole south-eastwards to the Uganda/Rwanda boundary; thence following the Uganda/Rwanda boundary westwards to the summit of Mount Sabinio; thence following the Uganda/Congo boundary northwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF LANGO.

Ridge (the approximate position of which is latitude 02° 34' north longitude 33° 33' east); thence following the crest of the Otukei Ridge to its summit; thence in a south-easterly direction to a point marked by a cairn on the northern end of the Alir Ridge; thence in a south-westerly direction to a point immediately to the west of the water hole in the Amone reach of the Moroto River; thence following the thalweg of that river to the junction of the Ogongo reach of the Moroto River; thence following the thalweg of the said river to its junction with the River Abero (Abota); thence following the thalweg of the River Abero to its source; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Odike; thence following the thalweg of the River Odike to its junction with the River Awelo; thence following the thalweg of the River Awelo to its junction with the River Apiyo; thence following the thalweg of the River Apiyo to its junction with the River Anyangubuku; thence following the thalweg of the River Anyangubuku-to its source; thence in a straight line south-westwards to the junction of the Rivers Pilach and Adakuno; thence following the thalweg of the River Pilach to the junction of the River Nyakabuko; thence following the thalweg of the River Nyakabuko upstream to its source; thence in a straight line south-westwards to the source of the River Aminidere; thence following the thalweg of the River Aminidere to its junction with the River Aligoi; thence following the River Aligoi upstream to its junction with the River Akuna; thence in a straight line to the junction of the River Ongolotok with the River Oyutabena; thence following the River Ongolotok to its source; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Abalang; thence following the thalweg of the River Abalang downstream to a point at which it is crossed by the embankment of the Kangai-Agaa Road; thence in a southerly direction following the eastern edge of the said road to a cairn situated approximately 400 yards south of the end of the said embankment; thence in a westerly direction following a line of cairns to the River Abiya; thence following the thalweg of the River Abiya upstream to a point at which it is crossed by the Agaa-Muntu Road; thence following the southern edge of the said road to the River Owicha; thence following the thalweg of the River Owicha to its source; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Paipai; thence following the thalweg of the River Paipai to its mouth in Lake Kyoga; thence in a straight line due south to the centre of Lake Kyoga (at an approximate latitude of 01° 29' north); thence westwards following the centre of Lake Kyoga to the north-east corner of the boundary of the District of East Mengo; thence following the boundary of the District of East Mengo to its junction with the boundary of the District of Bunyoro; thence northwards following the boundary of the District of Bunyoro to the point of commencement.

DISTRICT OF M A D I .

Commencing at the junction of the River Juma with the Victoria Nile; thence in a northerly and then in an easterly direction following the boundary of Acholi District to the junction of the Rivers Agago and Awach; thence in a straight line to the summit of the hill Kanyalmia; thence in a southerly direction to the most northerly point of the Otukei

Commencing at the point where the River Choro enters the Albert Nile; thence following the thalweg of the River Choro upstream to its source; thence in a straight line in an easterly direction to the source of the River Apa; thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to the source of the River Ceri; thence following the thalweg of the River Ceri downstream to its confluence with the River Aiyuge; thence following the thalweg of that river northwards to the junction with the River Nyeguta (Adidi); thence due eastwards to a point one mile to the west of the Atiak-Nimule road; thence in a northerly direction following a line parallel to and one mile west of the Atiak-Nimule road to the point

96

97

of intersection with the Uganda/Sudan boundary; thence following the Uganda/Sudan boundary westwards to the point where it crosses the Moyo-Kajo-Kaji road; thence following the West Nile District boundary southwards to the point of commencement.
DISTRICT OF MASAKA.

Commencing at the junction of the Rivers Kakoko and Katonga at Map Reference T R 7923 (Sheet NA-36-13); thence following the thalweg of the River Katonga upstream westwards to its junction with the River Kakinga (Kagaga); thence following the thalweg of the River Kakinga (Kagaga) upstream to its junction with the River Bugologolo; thence following the thalweg of the River Bugologolo to the westernmost corner of Public Land 1703; thence following the western and/or southern boundaries of P.L. 1703; Mawogola Block 56; P.L. 1703 again; Mawogola Blocks 55 and 57 and P.L. 1704 to meet the River Kakinga (Kagaga) again; thence following the thalweg of the River Kakinga (Kagaga) upstream in a southerly direction to its source near the southern corner of P.L. 1763; thence following the southwest boundary of S.E. 2335 to the source of the River Kalinega (Kalunyiga); thence following the thalweg of the River Kalinega (Kalunyiga) as defined by the western boundaries of Kabula Blocks 66, 69, 71, 75, 77 and 81 to its southwest corner; thence following the thalweg of the River Kalinega (Kalunyiga) into the northern end of Lake Kachira; thence following the centre of Lake Kachira and the centre of the swamp joining that lake with Lake Kalunga; thence following the centre of Lake Kalunga and the thalweg of the River Kijonjo (Chijonjo) to the northwest corner of Public Land 1388; thence following the southern and western boundaries of P.L. 1388; Koki Block 211; P.L. 1388 again; and P.L. 1436 to the Tanzania Border; thence in an easterly direction following the Uganda/Tanzania border to a point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VP 8690 (Sheet SA-36-2) where it meets the boundary of the District of East Mengo; thence due north and due west along the boundary of the District of East Mengo to the point in Lake Victoria where it meets the District of West Mengo at Map Reference VQ 4583 (Sheet SA-36-2); thence following the boundaries of the District of West Mengo in a westerly and northerly direction to the confluence of the Rivers Katonga and Nabakazi at Map Reference UR 1123 (Sheet NA-36-13); thence following the thalweg of the River Katonga (being the boundary of the District of Mubende) upstream westwards to the point of commencement. These Boundaries are more particularly shown on Boundary Plan No. 268 deposited at the Survey Records Office, Department of Lands and Surveys, Entebbe.
DISTRICT OF MUBENDE.

Commencing at the junction of the thalweg of the River Mayanja with the south bank of the River Kafu at Map Reference U S 7049 (Sheet NA-36-10); thence following the south-east bank of the River Kafu upstream to its confluence with the River Mpongo; thence following the thalweg of the River Mpongo upstream to its confluence with the River Kanangalo; thence following the thalweg of the River Kanangalo upstream to the north-east corner of Surplus Estate 2034; thence following successively the eastern and/or southern boundaries of S.E. 2034; Public Land 1268; S.E. 1767; Bugangaizi Block 191; P.L. 1267; Bugangaizi Block 310; S.E. 1770; Bugangaizi Blocks 314 and 326 to its southernmost corner; thence 9R

downstream along the thalweg of the River Nkusi as defined by the southern and western boundaries of Bugangaizi Blocks 324, 323, 322, P.L. 755 and Bugangaizi Block 300 to the confluence of the Rivers Nkusi and Namiko; thence following the eastern and/or southern boundaries of Buyaga Block 300; S.E. 849; S.E. 852; Buyaga Blocks 315, 310, 332 and 333 to the thalweg of the River Muzizi; thence upstream along the thalweg of the River Muzizi as defined by the southern and/or western boundaries of Buwekula Blocks 137 and 138; S.E, 773 and Buwekula Block 139 to its southernmost corner at the confluence of the Rivers Muzizi and Kanena; thence following the western and/or northern boundaries of Buwekula Blocks 173, 174, 189, 188, 199, 266, 265, 264, 262, 258, 257 and 250 to its north-west corner at the confluence of the Rivers Kaija and Lubale; thence following successively the thalwegs of the Rivers Lubale, Kakinga and Mukekemya as defined by the western boundaries of Buwekula Blocks 250, 251, 253, 288; S.E. 875; Buwekula Block 289; S.E. 879; Buwekula 'Blocks 290, 291, 292; S.E. 885, 886, 894; Buwekula Block 295 and S.E. 895 to the point where it meets the River Kakoko; thence following the thalweg of the River Kakoko to its junction with the River Katonga at Map Reference T R 7923 (Sheet NA-36-13); thence in a generally easterly direction downstream along the thalweg of the River Katonga to its confluence with the River Nabakazi; thence following the thalweg of the River Nabakazi upstream to a point at M a p Reference U S 4141 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence in a south-easterly direction to the western corner of Singo Block 429; thence in a generally south-easterly direction successively along the south-western boundaries of Singo Block 429, Surplus Estate 1331 and Public Lands 916, 917, 930 and 86 to the edge of the River Kibimba; thence in a straight line to the thalweg of the River Kibimba at Map Reference U R 5927 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence upstream along the thalweg of the River Kibimba to a point where it meets Lake Wamala at Map Reference UR 6732 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence in a south-easterly direction to the northwest corner of Gomba Block 169; thence successively along the northern and eastern boundaries of Gomba Blocks 169, 170, 168; thence continuing along the northern boundaries of Gomba Block 203; Surplus Estate 203 and Gomba Blocks 204, 205, 206, 207 and 223 and Public Land 88 to the thalweg of the River Kabasuma at Map Reference U R 8126 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence upstream along the thalweg of the River Kabasuma to a point at Map Reference U R 8324 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following successively the northern and western boundaries of Gomba Blocks 274, 273, 275, 276, 277, 278, 294, 288 and Public Land 521; thence continuing successively along the northern and western boundaries of Gomba Blocks 289, 290, 293, Public Land 524, and along the northern and eastern boundaries of Gomba Blocks 308, 311, 312 and 314; thence continuing successively along the northern and western boundaries of Butambala Blocks 77, 78, 108, 114 and 115 to the point at its northern corner where Butambala Block 115 meets the Kinikibi Forest; thence following success sively the western and northern boundaries of the Kinikibi and Nakasanga Forests to the western corner of Butambala Block 119 at Map Reference VR 1533 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence along the northern boundary of Butambala Blocks 119, 127 and 128 to the thalweg of the River Muyobozi; thence in a northerly direction downstream along the thalweg of the River Muyobozi to its confluence with the River Mayanja Kato; thence following the thalweg of the River Mayanja Kato downstream to its confluence with the River Mayanja Waswa; thence generally in a

99

northerly and westerly direction downstream along the thalweg of the River Mayanja to the point of commencement. These Boundaries are more particularly shown on Boundary Plan No. 268 deposited at the Survey Records Office, Department of Lands and Surveys, Entebbe.

DISTRICT OF SEBEI.

Commencing at the junction of the Karamoja boundary with the Uganda/Kenya boundary at the source of the Kanyerus River; thence following the Karamoja boundary westwards to a point on the Kelim or Greek River the longitude of which is 34° 25' 30" east; thence due south to meet the River Atari; thence following the thalweg of the River Atari upstream to the bottom of the foothills of Mount Elgon; thence following the bottom of the foothills south-westwards to the River Muyembe; thence following the River Muyembe upstream to its source; thence in a straight line to the summit of Mount Elgon (Wagagai); thence in the same straight line to meet the Uganda/Kenya boundary; thence following the Uganda/Kenya boundary north-westwards and then northwards to the point of commencement.

DISTRICT OF T E S O .

Commencing at the point in Lake Kyoga due west of Namalimoka Island where the boundary of Lango District starts to run northwards; thence following the boundary of Lango District northwards and northeastwards to its junction with the Karamoja District boundary; thence following the Karamoja District boundary east and south-eastwards to the point the longitude of which is 34° 13' 30" east in Lake Okolitorom; thence in a straight line southwards across the lake to the point of entry of the Siroko River into Lake Okolitorom; thence upstream along the thalweg of the River Siroko to a point the latitude of which is 01° 18' north; thence in a straight line to a point on the River Nabwisa where it is crossed by the Siroko-Koliri road; thence following the thalweg of the Nabwisa River upstream to its source; thence in a straight line to a point on the Walanga River \ mile due west of the Mbale-Sebei bridge crossing that river; thence in a straight line due south for a distance of 2\ miles to meet a tributary of the River Lwere; thence following the thalweg of that tributary to join the River Lwere; thence following the thalweg of the River Lwere to its entry into Lake Nyaguo; thence across the centre of Lake Nyaguo into Lake Nyasala; thence across the centre of Lake Nyasala to Lake Meito; thence in a north-westerly direction across that lake into Lake Adois; thence in a north-westerly, then south-westerly direction across the lake into Lake Kadiko; thence in a westerly direction following a channel and passing north of Namaranda Island into Lake Namasajeri; thence across the centre of that lake into Lake Kyoga; thence to the point of commencement.

District of Bunyoro; thence following the boundary of the District of Bunyoro in a southerly and south-easterly direction to its junction with the District of Mubende; thence in a generally southerly direction following the boundary of the District of Mubende, to its junction with the District of Masaka; thence westerly for a short distance following the boundary of the District of Masaka to its junction with the District of Ankole at the thalweg of the River Katonga; thence following the thalweg of the River Katonga upstream to its source in the swamp Nyetanga; thence following the centre of the said swamp to its junction with the River Rusangwe; thence following the thalweg of the River Rusangwe to its junction with the River Mpanga; thence following the thalweg of the River Mpanga to its junction with the River Bigera; thence following the thalweg of the River Bigera upstream to its junction with the River Kyebonikiri or Kyarutunga; thence following the thalweg of the River Kyebonikiri to its source; thence in a straight line in a south-easterly direction for one half-mile to the edge of a swamp known as Katahe; thence following the centre of that swamp to its junction with the River Karimirira; thence following the thalweg of the River Karimirira into the River Kalombi and following that river into the River Mulugenyi; thence following that river to its source; thence in a straight line south-westwards to a point on the River Nyakihanga one half-mile upstream of its junction with the River Mbisa; thence following the thalweg of the River Nyakihanga into the River Kitomi; thence following the thalweg of the River Kitomi to its junction with the River Buhindagi; thence following the thalweg of that river to its mouth in Lake George; thence following the southern shore of Lake George to the point of egress into the Kazinga Channel; thence following the centre of the Kazinga Channel to its entry into Lake Edward; thence in a straight line due west to meet the Uganda/Congo boundary; thence following the Uganda/Congo boundary generally northwards to the point of commencement.

DISTRICT OF W E S T M E N G O .

DISTRICT OF TORO.

Commencing at the confluence of the Rivers Katonga and Nabakazi at Map Reference U R 1123 (Sheet NA-36-13); thence following the thalweg of the River Katonga downstream in a south-easterly direction to a survey beacon marking the north-east corner of Public Land 173 at Map Reference U R 7400 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence in an easterly and southerly direction following successively the eastern boundaries of Public Lands 173, 177, 196 and 212 and Surplus Estate 121 to the point where it meets the shore of Lake Victoria at Map Reference U Q 8386 (Sheet SA-36-2); thence in a south-easterly direction to a point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference U Q 8883 (Sheet SA-36-2); thence due east to another point in Lake Victoria at Map Reference VQ 4583 (Sheet SA-36-2); thence following the boundaries of the District of East Mengo in a clockwise manner to the confluence of the Rivers Mayanja Kato and Mayanja Waswa at Map Reference VR 1464 (Sheet NA-36-14); thence following the boundaries of the District of Mubende also in a clockwise manner to the point of commencement. These Boundaries are more particularly shown on Boundary Plan No. 268 deposited at the Survey Records Office, Department of Lands and Surveys, Entebbe.

Commencing at the highest summit of the Ruwenzori Range (Margherita Peak); thence following the Uganda/Congo boundary in a north and north-easterly direction to its junction with the boundary of the

DISTRICT OF WEST NILE.

Commencing at the point of the Uganda/Congo boundary opposite Mahagi Port where it is met by the boundaries of the Districts of Acholi and Bunyoro; thence following the Uganda/Congo boundary west and northwards to the trijunctional point of the Uganda/Congo/Sudan boundaries; thence following the Uganda/Sudan boundary to the point where it crosses the Moyo/Kajo-Kaji road; thence in a straight line south-westwards to a point on the Moyo-Arua road which is 2,500 yards south-east of the Nyawa River bridge (and is 3,200 yards west (along the road), of the Ee River bridge); thence in a straight line to a point the latitude of which is 03° 27' north and the longitude of which is 31° 27' east; thence in a straight line to a point the latitude of which is 03° 16' 10" north and the longitude of which is 31° 25' 40" east situated in the Gangu swamp; thence following the centre of the swamp south-eastwards into the Albert Nile; thence following the thalweg of the Albert Nile to its egress from Lake Albert; thence in a straight line to the point of commencement.

t

