CONSTITUTION of the United States of Venezuela.- Caracas,
 April 27, 1881.
THE Congress of the United States of Venezuela, having taken
 into consideration and carefully examined the Petitions which the
 20 States forming the Venezuelan Federation bad presented through
 the medium of their respective Legislatures, praying for the reform
 of the Constitution of 1874, in absolute accordance with the
 Project which the Congress submitted to them for discussion, and
 with all the modifications proposed by the illustrious American,
 President of the Republic, in the Message which, on the 15th
 October, 1880, he addressed to the Legislature of the several States,
 without essential alterations in the general scope of the reform,
 bearing also in mind the wish expressed by the different sections as
 regards their respective union;
 Decrees:
 The Constitution of the United States of Venezuela shall be
 that which the Legislatures of the 20 States forming the Venezuelan
 Federation have petitioned for, in the following terms:-
 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES or VENEZUELA.
 CHAPTER I.-The Nation.
 � 1. Of the Territory.
 ART. 1. The States which the Constitution of the 28th March,
 1804,$ declared independent of each other and united to form the
 Venezuelan Federation, and which now bear the inaes of Apure,
 Bolivar, Barquisimeto, Barcelona, Carabobo, Cojedes, Cuman 6,
 Faloon, Guzman Blauco, Guarico, Guayaua, Guzman, MAtiurin,
 Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora,

 
 and Zulia, constitute nine great political entities, in the following
 order:
 The State of Oriente, consisting of Barcelona, Cumand, and
 Maturin; the State of Guzman Blanco, consisting of Bolivar,
 Guzman Blanco, Guarico, and Nueva Esparta; the State of Cara-
 bobo, consisting of Carabobo and Nirgua; the State of Sur de
 Occidente, composed of Cogedes, Portuguesa, and Zamora; the
 State of Norte de Occidente, formed by Barquisimeto and Yaracuy,
 with the exception of the Department of Nirgua; the State of Los
 Andes, composed of Guzman, Trujillo, and Tachira: the State of
 Bolivar, consisting of Guayana and Apure; the State of Zulia; and
 the State of Falcon.
 The above-mentioned States unite to continue forming a sole,
 free, independent, and sovereign nation, under the name of United
 States of Venezuela.
 2. The boundaries of these great States shall be settled in conformity with the limits which the Law of the 28th April, 1856, fixed
 for the old Provinces, and which determined the last division of
 territory until such time as the same shall be reformed.
 3. The boundaries of the United States of Venezuela are similar
 to those which, in the year 1810, constituted the limits of the old
 Captaincy-General of Venezuela.
 4. The States which unite to form great political entities shall
 be called Sections. They are equal; the Constitutions which they
 may devise for their internal organization shall be in harmony with
 the federative principle established by this Constitution; the power
 which is not deputed to any Legislative Body remains with the State,
 without any limitations but those consequent upon the Union.
 2. Of Venezuelans.
 5. Are Venezuelans-
 (1.) All individuals born on Venezuelan territory, whatever may
 be the nationality of their parents;
 (2.) The children of a Venezuelan father or mother, who may
 have been born in a foreign country, if in the event of their residing
 in the country they should express a wish to adopt the Venezuelan
 nationality;
 (3.) Foreigners who shall have obtained letters of naturalization;
 (1.) Individuals who, having been born in any one of the Spanish
 American Republics, or in the Spanish Antilles, should establish
 their domicile on the territory of the Republic and should manifest
 their desire to become Venezuelan citizens;
 G. Those individuals who shall take up their residence and
 acquire letters of naturalization in a foreign country shall not
 forfeit thereby the Venezuelan nationality.
 
 
 7. All Venezuelans of the male sex and over 21 years of age are
 eligible for public appointments, except in the cases provided for by
 this Constitution.
 8. All Venezuelans are under the obligation of serving the nation
 in the manner prescribed by law, making the sacrifice of their property and of their lives, were such a course necessary for the defence
 of the country.
 9. All Venezuelans shall, in all the States of the Union, enjoy
 the privileges and immunities inherent to their condition of citizens
 of the Federation; they shall, moreover, have the same duties as the
 natives and other individuals domiciled in the State.
 10. Foreigners shall participate in all the civil rights common
 to Venezuelans; their lives and property shall enjoy the same
 security.
 They shall only appeal to diplomatic intervention in cases prescribed by law and public Treaties.
 11. The law shall determine the privileges pertaining to the condition of foreigners, whether the same have established a permanent
 domicile, or their residence in the country be temporary.
 CHAPTER 11.-Bases of the Union.
 12. The States which constitute the Venezuelan Federation
 recognize their respective autonomy; they affirm their equality as
 political entities, and retain to the fullest extent the sovereignty not
 expressly delegated by this Constitution.
 13. The States of the Venezuelan Federation agree:
 (1.) To organize their administration in accordance with the
 principles of a popular, elective, federal, representative, alternate,
 and responsible Government.
 (2.) To frame the fundamental laws of their administration and
 internal government conformably to the rules laid down by this
 Constitution.
 (3.) To defend themselves against any violent attack on the sectional independence or the integrity of the Venezuelan Federation.
 (4.) Not to alienate to a foreign Power any portion of their territory, or to implore foreign protection. The States shall not establish
 or carry on diplomatic or political relations with any other nations,
 this privilege being confined to the Federal Power.
 (5.) Not to enter into any alliance with, or join their territory to,
 that of any foreign Power, to the detriment of the Venezuelan
 nationality or country.
 (6.) To cede to the nation the land which may be required for
 tie formation of the Federal district.
 (7.) To grant to the Federal Government the lands which may
 be deemed requisite for time building of fortresses, Government stores, dockyards, prisons, and other edifices for the use of the
 General Government.
 (8.) To relinquish the government of the territories of Amazonas
 and Goagira, and that of the islands belonging to the nation, to the
 charge of the Federal Power, until it shall be considered advisable to
 raise the same to another political status.
 (9.) To reserve to the Federal Government all legislative and
 executive jurisdiction in matters concerning the maritime, coasting,
 and river navigation and national thoroughfares; roads which traverse
 the boundaries of a State, or lead from the same to the Federal district, shall be considered the property of the nation.
 (10.) Not to levy taxes on produce already subject to national
 contributions, or exempted from the same by law, previous to such
 produce having been offered to the public for consumption.
 (11.) Not to exact duties on cattle, goods, or any produce in
 transit from a neighbouring State, in order that trade remain free
 and the produce of one section be not taxed by another.
 (12.) Not to prohibit the consumption of the produce of other
 States, or to levy higher general or municipal taxes on goods of
 foreign importation than those imposed on local produce.
 (13.) Not to establish inland or maritime custom-houses for the
 collection of duties, this right being reserved to the Federal
 Government,
 (14.) To recognize the right of each State to dispose of their
 natural produce.
 (15.) To yield to the Federal Government the administration of
 their mines, common lands, and salt works, in order that the former
 be worked on a uniform system, and that the revenue derived from
 the latter be applied to the improvement of the townships.
 (16.) To respect national property, arsenals, and fortresses.
 (17.) To execute and cause to be carried out the dictates of the
 Constitution and Laws of the Federation, and the decrees and orders
 which the Federal Powers, Tribunals, and Federal Courts may issue
 in the exercise of their attributions and legal power.
 (18.) To give credence to, and cause to be executed and carried
 out, all public acts and judicial proceedings of other States.
 (19.) To organize their Tribunals and Courts for the dispensation of justice in the State, and to maintain for all a similar substantive, criminal, and civil legislative code, and laws regulating civil
 and criminal procedure.
 (20.) To name members for the Court of Cassation, and to
 submit to the decision of this Supreme Tribunal of the States.
 (21.) To inert criminal extradition as a political principle in
 their respective Constitutions.
 ('22.) To establish direct no  public suffrage in the popular
 981
 elections, rendering the vote obligatory, and guaranteeing the same
 by the electoral census. The voter shall express his wish during a
 public Session of the Electoral Committee, who shall inscribe the
 same in the Registers provided by law for the elections, which
 Registers may on no account be replaced by others; the voter shall
 record his vote by signing the Register; should he from any motive
 be incapacitated from so doing, he may depute any citizen to per-
 form the act in his stead. Without these conditions no vote shall be
 considered valid.
 (23.) To institute primary education and professional instruction.
 (24.) To defer to the Federal Government the enactment of the
 laws and provisions necessary for the creation, preservation, and
 improvement of general schools, colleges, and universities destined
 for scientific education.
 (25.) Not to impose obligations on national officials, except in
 their capacity of citizens of a State, and only in so far as such
 duties shall not be incompatible with the public service.
 (26.) To provide their respective contingent of men for the
 formation of the national forces in time of peace or war.
 (27.) Not to permit in any State of the Federation the enlistment or levy of troops for the purpose of attacking their liberty or
 independence, or of subverting the public order of another State, of
 the nation, or of a foreign Power.
 (28.) To maintain strict neutrality in the conflicts which may
 arise in other States.
 (20.) Not to declare or wage war against another State.
 (30.) To refer to and submit to the decision of the High Federal
 Court all differences which may exist between two or more States in
 cases when they are unable, by agreement or any peaceful means, to
 arrive at the solution of the same. Should the States from any
 motive not appoint an Arbitrator to whose decision they agree to
 defer, the sentence, ipso facto, rests with the High Federal Court.
 (31.) To recognize the competency of the Congress and the 11igh
 Federal Court for the trial of officials exercising executive authority
 in the States, who may be arraigned for treason or accused of
 violating the Constitution and Federal Laws. This clause shall be
 inserted in the several Constitutions of the States, and the trial
 shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure established by
 the general laws, and the sentence shall be pronounced conformably
 to the same.
 (32.) To appropriate as the revenue of the States: two-thirds
 of the total income derived from the "transit tax " levied at the
 custom-houses of the Republic; two-thirds of the proceeds of the
 mines, common lands, and salt works managed by the Federal
 
 981 
 
 
 Government; and to distribute this income among the several States
 in proportion to their respective population.
 (33.) To yield to the Federal Power the remaining third part of
 the proceeds of the transit tax, mines, common lands, and salt works,
 to be applied to national improvements.
 (34.) To detain at a distance from the frontier political refugees
 from another State whenever the State concerned may so desire.
 CHAPTER III.- Of the Guarantees of Venezuelans.
 14. The nation secures to Venezuelans:
 (1.) Inviolability of life, capital punishment being abolished,
 whatever law may have permitted the same.
 (2.) Possession of property and all rights and privileges pertaining to the same, subject only to taxes decreed by the legislative
 authority, to judicial sentences, and to seizure for public works
 after compensation shall have been afforded through a contrary
 sentence.
 (3.) Inviolability and secrecy of correspondence and other
 private papers.
 (4.) Privacy of their domicile, which may not be entered except
 under a search-warrant to prevent the perpetration of crime; this
 measure shall be carried into effect in accordance with the law.
 (5.) Personal liberty; and therefore-
 (a.) Procuring by force for military service is abolished;
 (b.) Slavery is proscribed forever;
 (c.) Slaves setting foot on Venezuelan territory are free;
 (d.) No individual may be coerced to act contrary to law or be
 prohibited from acting in a manner not forbidden by law.
 (6.) Freedom of thought expressed by word of mouth or by
 means of the press; the latter may not be restricted by previous
 censure. In cases of libel or injury to a third person the plaintiff
 has the right of justifying himself before a competent Tribunal, as
 prescribed by common law.
 (7.) The power of travelling without a passport, of changing
 their domicile, carrying  out the forms determined by law, of
 absenting themselves from and returning to the Republic, taking
 with them and bringing back their property.
 (8.) Freedom of industry, and in consequence the proprietorship
 of inventions and productions. The law shall grant temporary
 privileges to the owners, or shall assign a mode of compensation
 should the author agree to publish his discovery.
 (0.) Freedom of unarmed public or private meeting or association, the authorities being debarred from the right of inspection or
 interference.
 (10.) The right of petition and the power of obtaining redress;
the request may be brought before any official authority or corporate
 body. Should the petition be signed by more than one individual,
 the first five shall be answerable for the authenticity of the remaining signatures, and all are responsible for the truth of the facts
 alleged.
 (11.) Freedom of suffrage in the popular elections, the minimum
 limit of age of the voter being fixed at 18 years.
 (12.) Liberty of education, which shall be secured to the fullest
 extent. The Government shall establish gratuitous primary education and professional instruction.
 (13.) Religious liberty.
 (14.) Individual security; and therefore-
 (a.) Venezuelans may not be arrested or imprisoned for debts
 which do not result from fraud or crime;
 (b.) Nor may they be constrained to receive troops in their
 domicile, whether billeted or quartered in the same;
 (c.) Nor shall they be tried by special Tribunals or Commissions,
 but by the usual Judges and in virtue of laws enacted previous to
 the commission of the crime or action to be tried;
 (d.) Nor shall they be arrested or imprisoned previous to a
 summary inquiry, resulting in -proof of the crime punished by
 confinement having taken place, and a warrant signed by the
 official ordering the arrest and expressing the motive for the cane,
 unless the individual be taken in the act;
 (e.) They shall not be prohibited from communicating with their
 fellow-citizens;
 (J.) They shall not be obliged to take an oath, nor to suffer
 cross-examination on criminal matters implicating either themselves
 or their relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity, the
 second of affinity or marriage;
 (y.) Nor shall they continue in prison once the cause for the
 same has ceased to exist;
 (h.) Nor shall they be sentenced    to suffer punishment in
 criminal matters without their defence having been legally heard:
 (i.) They shall not suffer confinement for a term    of years
 exceeding 10 in number;
 (j) They shall not be deprived of their liberty for political
 motives, once order shall have been re-established.
 (15.) Equality; in virtue of which-
 (o.) All citizens shall be tried by the same laws and be subject
 to like duties, obligations, and contributions;
 (b.) No titles of nobility honours and hereditary distinctions
 shall be conferred, neither shall there be granted offices or appointments whose salary or emoluments should exceed the duration of
 the services rendered;

 (c.) Officials and corporate bodies shall not be addressed in a
 formal manner by other terms than " Sir " or " Citizen." 
 15. This enumeration does not preclude the States from according
 to their inhabitants other guarantees besides those specified.
 16. The laws of the States shall inflict penalties on all those
 violating these guarantees, a form of procedure being established to
 render the same effective.
 17. Those who shall issue, sign, execute, or cause to be carried
 out decrees, orders, or resolutions breaking or infringing any one
 of the guarantees secured to Venezuelans are guilty, and shall be
 punished in the manner prescribed by law. Any citizen may
 denounce similar acts.
 CHAPTER IV.-Of the National Legislature.
 1.
 18. The National Legislature shall consist of two Chambers, one
 of Senators, the other of Deputies.
 19. The States shall determine the mode of election of the
 Deputies.
 2. Of the Chamber of Deputies.
 20. In order to form the Chamber of Deputies, each State shall
 appoint, by popular vote according to paragraph 22, Article 13, of
 this Constitution, one Deputy for every 35,000 inhabitants, and one
 other for any number exceeding 15,000. The States shall in like
 manner elect substitutes equal in number to the Deputies.
 21. The Deputies shall hold their appointments during four
 years ; they shall, after the above-mentioned period, stand for
 re-election.
 22. The following are the duties of the Chamber of Deputies-
 (1.) To examine the Annual Report presented by the President
 of the United States of Venezuela.
 (2.) To pronounce a vote of censure on the Ministers of State,
 who, ipso facto, vacate their office.
 (3.) To try accusations brought against the Chief of the National
 Executive of high treason, infringement of the Constitution, or of
 ordinary crime; to try Ministers of state and other national authorities for violation of the Constitution and general laws, and for
 the improper exercise of authority, in the manner prescribed by
 Article 75 of this Constitution, to try the high officials of the States
 for breach of the Constitution and Laws of the Republic. These
 powers do not impair the legal authority of other Courts for the
 trial and punishment of offenders.
 23. The following procedure shall be that observed for the
 impeachment of a Deputy or corporate body:
 
(1,) A Committee composed of three Deputies shall be elected
 by secret voting.
 (2.) The Committee shall, within the lapse of three days, deter-
 mine whether or not to find a true bill.
 (3.) The Chamber shall investigate the Report and shall decide
 thereon, taking the vote of the absolute majority of the members
 present; the Deputy preferring the accusation shall refrain from
 recording his vote.
 24. The finding of a true count incapacitates the accused from
 the execution of his duties and from exercising any public office
 during the trial.
3. Of the Senate.
 25. The Legislatures of the several States shall each elect three
 principal Senators, and three substitutes should any vacancy occur.
 26. The candidate for the office of Senator must be of Venezuelan
 birth, and 30 years of age.
 27. The Senators' appointments shall last four years, when they
 may stand for re-election.
 28. The Senate has the power of substantiating and pronouncing
 sentence in trials instituted before the Chamber.
 29. Should the trial not have terminated during the Session, the
 Senate shall remain assembled for the above-mentioned object until
 the conclusion of the same.
4. Arrangements common to both Chambers.
 30. The National Legislature shall assemble every year in the
 capital of the United States on the 20th February, or as nearly as
 possible at that date, without awaiting a special summons. The
 Session shall last during 70 days; the term may be prolonged
 to 90 days should the majority so decide.
 31. The Chambers shall open their Sessions in the presence of
 at least two-thirds of their members; in the event of the absence of a
 quorum, the Chambers shall assemble and form a Preparatory Com-
 mission, and decide on the steps to be taken to secure a quorum.
 32. The Sessions, after having been opened, may be held in the
 presence of two-thirds of the members, whenever the above-mentioned number does not fall below one-half of the total number of
 representatives.
 33. Although the two Chambers shall hold separate sittings,
 they may assemble in Congress on occasions prescribed by the
 Constitution and Laws, or whenever one Chamber shall deem such a
 meeting advisable. The Chamber receiving the invitation shall fix
 the day and hour of assembly.
 
34. The Sessions shall generally be public, but the Chamber may
 direct the exclusion of spectators if it be considered desirable.
 35. The Chambers possess the right-
 (1.) Of framing the Rules to be observed during the Sessions
 and debates.
 (2.) Of inflicting penalties on transgressors.
 (3.) Of establishing a force of police for the protection of their
 place of meeting.
 (4.) Of punishing and reproving spectators who may break the
 Rules framed for the preservation of order.
 (5.) Of removing any obstacle which may interfere with the
 execution of their duty.
 (6.) Of ordering their privative resolutions to be carried out.
 (7.) Of confirming the election of Deputies, and receiving their
 resignations.
 30. One Chamber may not suspend their Sessions or change
 their residence without the consent of the other; in case of divergence of opinion the vote of the majority shall decide on the course
 to be followed.
 37. The exercise of any public office is incompatible with the
 appointment of Senator or Deputy during the period of the Session.
 The law shall determine the amount of the compensation to be
 granted to members of the National Legislature. Whenever an
 increase of the sum granted for compensation shall have been
 decreed, the law prescribing the same shall not be in force until the
 subsequent period, when the Chambers sanctioning the same shall
 have been renewed.
 38. Senators and Deputies shall enjoy inviolability from the
 20th January of each year until a term of 30 days after the close of
 the Session; the aforesaid immunity consists of the suspension of
 all criminal and civil proceedings against their persons, whatever
 may have been the origin or nature of the same. Should any
 Senator or Deputy commit an act punishable by imprisonment, a
 summary inquiry nay be held, but no trial can ensue until the
 term of the period of inviolability be reached.
 30. Congress shall be presided over by the President of the
 Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall act
 as Vice-President.
 40. Members of the Chambers shall not be held responsible
 for the speeches made or the opinions expressed by them during the
 8ession.
 11. Senators and Deputies accepting appointments or office at
 the hands of the National Executive ipso facto vacate their seats as
 Representatives in the Chamber to which they had been elected.
 42. No Senator or Deputy shall enter into any contract with the
 General Government, or press the claims of others before their consideration.
5. Attributions of the National Legislature.
 43. The National Legislature possesses the following attributions:
 (1.) To settle all differences which may arise between two or
 more States.
 (2.) To establish the Federal district in an uninhabited territory
 of an area not exceeding 3 square miles, in which shall be built the
 capital city of the Republic. The district shall be neutral, and shall
 not hold other elections than those which the law shall prescribe for
 the local administration of the same. The district shall temporarily
 be that which the Constituent Assembly has decreed, or that which
 the National Legislature shall determine.
 (3.) To organize all matters relating to the Customs, the revenue
 derived from which shall constitute the Treasury of the Union,
 until the same shall have been substituted by another mode of
 taxation.
 (4.) To decide all questions concerning the opening of ports and
 the security of the coast.
 (5.) To create and organize the National Post Office, and levy
 dues on the transport of correspondence.
 (6.) To compile the National Code of Laws in accordance with
 paragraph 19, Article 13, of this Constitution.
 (7.) To fix the value, pattern, alloy, weight, and mint of the
 National coinage, and decide on the admission and circulation of
 foreign money.
 (8.) To devise the coat-of-arms and National Standard, which
 shall be the same for all the States.
 (9.) To create, abolish, and provide funds for the appointment
 of the nation.
 (10.) To dictate provisions for the payment of the National
 Debt.
 (11.) To raise loans on the national credit.
 (12.) To take measures for the further progress of the census of
 the population and national statistics.
 (13.) To fix every year the number of men of which the naval
 and land forces are to consist, and to frame the military regulations.
 (14.) To define the procedure for the enlistment and substitution
 of the troops mentioned in the previous paragraph.
 (15.) To declare war and require the National Executive to
 initiate negotiations for the conclusion of peace.
 (16.) To approve or reject Treaties and Diplomatic Conventions; they may not be ratified or exchanged unless this clause be
 observed.
 (17.) To accept or refuse contracts for national public works
 which may have been entered into by the President with the approbation of the Federal Council; no contract shall be carried out
 except under this condition.
 (18.) To present every year the Budget of national expenditure.
 (19.) To promote measures for the further prosperity of the
 country and the progress of the same in the knowledge of art- and
 sciences.
 (20.) To establish uniform national weights and measures.
 (21.) To form under the name of " territories " the special
 administration of regions sparsely populated by independent or
 uncivilized native tribes. The aforesaid territories shall remain
 under the immediate jurisdiction of the executive power of the
 Union.
 (22.) To grant amnesties.
 (28.) To determine the legal procedure and dictate the penalties
 to be inflicted by the Senate on pronouncing sentence in the trials
 carried on by the Chamber of Deputies.
 (24.) To increase the ratio of inhabitants necessary for the
 election of a Representative.
 (25.) To allow or prohibit the admission of foreigners into the
 service of the Republic.
 (26.) To frame laws for the retirement of military men and their
 pensions.
 (27.) To define the law relating to the responsibility of public
 officials and the authorities of the States for breach of the Constitutions and general laws of the Union.
 (28.) To prescribe the mode of according military commissions
 and promotion.
 (20.) To elect the Federal Council established by this Constitution, and to call upon the " substitute " Deputies and Senators to
 occupy the seats vacated by the former.
 44. Besides the preceding enumeration, the National Legislature
 shall have the right of enacting the general laws which they may
 deem necessary; no law violating in any manner this Constitution
 may be promulgated, still less carried out. The present Constitution defines the attributions of the public powers of Venezuela.
U. Of the Formation of the Laws.
 15. The Laws and Decrees of the National Legislature may be
 proposed by members of either Chamber whenever such projects
 shall not depart from the dispositions established for the Parliament
 of Venezuela.
46. When a project shall have been brought forward, the same
 shall be read and be considered; should the project have been
 accepted, three discussions, one day at least intervening between
 each, shall take place, observing the rules framed for debate.
 47. The projects which shall have obtained the assent of the
 Chamber in which they originated shall be transferred to the other
 for the purpose specified in the foregoing Article, and in the event
 of their not being rejected they shall be returned to the Chamber in
 which they originated, with the amendments they may have under-
 gone.
 48. Should the Chamber originating the project not admit the
 amendments suggested, they may insist and present their reasons for
 such action to the other Chamber in writing. They may then unite
 in Congress and name a Committee to devise a mode of adjustment;
 should, however, a settlement not be agreed on, the project shall
 be null and void of effect if the Chamber in which the project
 originated shall decide to insist upon its objections.
 49. On the project being transferred from one Chamber to the
 other, the da3 s on which the same shall have been discussed shall be
 specified.
 .50. The law which reforms any preceding Decree shall be
 enacted as a whole, and the foregoing law shall be cancelled.
 51. The following legal formula shall be adopted: "The Congress
 of the United States of Venezuela" . . . . "decrees "
 52, Projects which shall have been rejected during one legislative period shall not be introduced again until the following term.
 53. Projects which at the close of the Session shall not have
 passed shall, during the next Session, be subjected to the three
 debates required by law.
 51. Laws are abrogated with the same forms as those which are
 established for their sanction.
 55. When the Ministers of State shall have represented to the
 Chamber, by word of mouth or "by writing, the unconstitutional
 character of a project, and the Chamber shall nevertheless accord
 legal sanction to the same, the executive power, with the affirmative
 vote of the Federal Council, shall suspend the execution of the
 same and shall call upon the Legislative Bodies of the States to
 make known their " veto."
 50. In the event of the occurrence provided for by the foregoing
 Article each State shall possess one vote expressed by the majority
 of the members of the Legislature, and shall forward the result of
 their deliberations to the High Federal Court with the words
 Confirmed " or " Rejected."
 57. Should the majority of the States Legislature hold the same
 view as the Federal Executive, the High Federal Court shall confirm the decree of suspension, and the Executive present a full
 report of the event to the next Congress.
 58. No law shall be in force until the same shall have been
 promulgated in the established forms.
 59. The power of sanctioning laws may be delegated.
 60. No legal statute may be of retroactive effect, except in
 matters of judicial proceedings, and in such case the lowest penalty
 only shall be inflicted.
 CHAPTER V.-Of the General Power of the Federation.
 61. There shall exist a Federal Council, composed of one Senator
 and one Deputy for each political entity, besides one Deputy for the
 Federal district. These shall be chosen every two years among the
 Representatives of the several States of the Federation and of the
 Federal district.
 (1.) The election shall take place during the first fortnight of
 the meeting of Congress in the first and third year of the Constitutional period.
 62. The Federal Council shall elect one of their members
 President of the United States of Venezuela, and in like manner
 they shall appoint an Acting President in the event of the temporary absence or death of the President during the Constitutional
 term. The election to the office of President of the United States
 of Venezuela of a candidate not possessing the qualification of
 membership of the Federal Council shall be null and void of effect.
 The foregoing paragraph also comprises the election of Acting
 Presidents.
 63. The term of office of the members of the Federal Council
 shall last two years and be of equal duration with that of the
 President of the United States of Venezuela. Neither shall they
 be re-eligible for the immediate period, but shall return and occupy
 their seats in the Chambers to which they had belonged.
 64. The Federal Council shall reside in the (Federal) district,
 and shall exercise the authority granted to them by this Constitution. They shall not hold their Sessions in the presence of a
 number of members less than that forming the absolute majority
 of their total number; they shall frame the rules to be observed in
 the execution of their duties, and shall name annually the member
 who shall preside over their Sessions.
 1.
 65. The attributions of the President of the United States of
 Venezuela are:
 (1.) To appoint and dismiss the Ministers of State.
 
 (2.) To preside over the Cabinet, in whose deliberations lie shall
 possess a voice, and to inform the Federal Council of all matters
 concerning the General Government.
 (3.) To receive and compliment the Public Ministers.
 (4.) To sign the official communications addressed to the
 Sovereigns or Presidents of foreign nations.
 (5.) To decree the execution and watch over the carrying out
 of the Decrees and Laws issued by the National Legislature.
 (6.) To publish the Resolutions and Decrees which shall have
 been submitted to, and have obtained the assent of, the Federal
 Council, as provided for by Article 66 of this Constitution.
 (7.) To organize the Federal district, and to exercise in the same
 the principal civil and political authority established by this Constitution.
 (8.) To grant ship's papers to national vessels.
 (9.) To inform Congress in the course of the first eight days of
 their annual meeting of the cases where he shall, with the assent of
 the Federal Council, have made use of any one or all the powers
 accorded to him by Article 66 of this Constitution.
 (10.) To carry out all obligations imposed on him by the
 national laws.
 60. Beyond the above-mentioned attributions, which are peculiar
 to the President of the United States of Venezuela, the same shall,
 with the deliberative vote of the Federal Council, possess the
 following obligations:
 (1.) To preserve the nation from all outward attack.
 (2.) To administer the common lands, mines, and salt works of
 the several States who shall confer their power upon him.
 (3.) To summon the National Legislature for their ordinary
 assembly, and to call a special Session when the importance of any
 matter shall require such a meeting.
 (4.) To fill up diplomatic appointments and posts of Consuls-
 General and Consuls; the two former shall be conferred only on
 candidates of Venezuelan birth.
 (5.) To carry on negotiations and conclude Treaties with other
 nations, submitting the same to the National Legislature.
 (0.) To enter into contracts touching national interests, according
 to law, and to place the same before the National Legislature for
 their approbation.
 (7.) To appoint fiscal agents whose nomination does not rest with
 any other authority. Venezuelan birth is an indispensable qualification for these posts.
 (8.) To remove from office and suspend officials whose appointments emanate from him, committing them for trial should such a
 course be necessary.
 (9.) To declare war in the name of the Republic when Congress
 shall have decreed the same.
 (10.) The President shall, in the event of a foreign war-
 (a.) Require the States to furnish the auxiliary forces for the
 national defence;
 (b.) Levy taxes in advance, and raise the loans decreed by the
 National Legislature;
 (c.) Arrest and expel from the country individuals belonging to
 lie belligerent Power who shall manifest opposition to the defence
 of the country;
 (d.) Suspend those guarantees which shall be incompatible with
 the protection of the Republic, excepting the inviolability of life;
 (e.) Determine the locality where the general power shall temporarily reside when there shall exist imperative reasons for such
 action;
 (f.) Arraign for high treason any Venezuelan who shall resist
 the measures taken for the national defence;
 (g.) Issue letters of marque and prescribe the course to be
 pursued for dealing with the prizes captured.
 (11.) To make use of the power expressed by clauses (a), (b),
 and (e) of the foregoing paragraph for the purpose of re-establishing
 public order in the event of an armed rising against the institutions
 which the nation has established for itself.
 (12.) To dispose of the national forces for the purpose of sup-
 pressing any armed collision between two or more States, requiring
 them to lay down their arms and to submit their differences to the
 decision of an Arbitrator in the manner agreed to by paragraph 30,
 Article 13, of this Constitution.
 (13.) To direct military operations and appoint the Commander-
 in-chief of the army.
 (14.) To organize the national forces in times of peace.
 (15.) To grant general or particular amnesties,
 (16.) To defend the territory forming the Federal district in the
 event of invasion of the same by a hostile force.
 � 2. Of the Ministers of State.
 07. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall
 appoint for the transaction of business the number of Ministers of
 State determined by the law, which law shall define their functions
 and duties and organize their departments.
 68. To be qualified for the office of Minister of State, the candidate shall have attained the age of 25 years; he shall be of Venezuelan birth, and have resided in the Republic during five years.
 69. The Ministers are the natural and necessary mouthpieces of
 the President of the United States of Venezuela. All decrees
 issued by the latter shall be countersigned by the Ministers; they
 shall not in any other case be executed or carried out by the authorities, officials, or private individuals.
 70. All Ministerial Acts shall be determined according to this
 Constitution and the General Laws.     They are not freed from
 responsibility by an order emanating from the President, even
 though the same be given in writing.
 71. All matters not inherent to the interior organization of the
 Departments shall be decided by a Cabinet Council; their responsibility shall be mutual and collective.
 72. The Ministers of State shall, in the course of the first five
 Sessions of each year, present to the Chamber a Report of their
 past policy and a sketch of the future course of their respective
 Departments. They shall, moreover, accord any verbal or written
 information which may be demanded, omitting only that which
 should relate to diplomatic negotiations.
 73. They shall, within the same lapse of time, present to the
 National Legislature the budget of public expenditure for the
 ensuing year, and a general account of the past financial twelve-
 month.
 74. The Ministers of State possess the right of speech in the
 Chambers, and may be called upon to assist at the Sessions when
 they are required to report.
 75. Ministers are responsible-
 (1.) For high treason.
 (2.) For infringement of this Constitution and the General
 Laws.
 (3.) For maladministration of the public funds.
 (4.) For expenditure beyond the sums voted in the Estimates.
 (5.) For subornation and bribery in the execution of the duties
 pertaining to their office, or in the appointment of public officials.
 ((.) For their non-compliance with the decisions of the Federal
 Council.
 CHAPTER VI. Of the High Federal Court.
 S 1. Of the Formation of the same.
 76. The High Federal Court shall consist of a number of
 members equal to that of the States of the Federation, and those
 Members shall be possessed (if the following Qualifications:-
 (1.) Venezuelan birth.
 (2.) The minimum age of 30 years.
 77. Congress shall assemble on the 15th day of their ordinary
 
 Sessions; the Representatives of the several States shall form
 " groups," and shall proceed to nominate a number of candidates for
 the principal membership, and a similar number of Deputies for the
 same. Congress shall, in the course of the same Session, or during
 the immediately subsequent meeting, appoint one principal member
 and one substitute from the list presented by the respective
 "groups."
 78. The law shall define the diverse functions of the members
 and other officials of the High Federal Court.
 79. The principal members and their substitutes shall hold their
 appointments during four years. No principal or deputy member
 of the High Federal Court shall accept any office or employment
 from the executive power during the above-mentioned period prior
 to his having sent in his resignation, and the same having been
 legally admitted. The violation of this condition shall be punished
 by four years' inhabilitation from the exercise of any public office
 in Venezuela.
 - 2. Attributions of the High Federal Court.
 20. The following lie within the competency of the High Federal
 Court:
 (1.) To institute proceedings in the civil and criminal suits
 brought against Diplomatic Agents in the cases permitted by the
 international law of nations.
 (2.) To try the accusations brought by the President against his
 Ministers, who shall be informed of the same in the event of their
 suspension from office being decreed.
 (3.) To try cases of Ministerial responsibility when they shall
 have been impeached for infraction of the provisions of this Constitution. Should suspension from office be deemed necessary, the
 High Federal Court shall petition the President, who shall grant
 their request.
 (4.) To proceed against Diplomatic Agents accredited to other
 nations for improper exercise of their functions.
 (5.) To try cases in which the nation shall appear as a party
 when the law shall prescribe a similar course.
 (0.) To settle questions of competency or jurisdiction which may
 arise between the political authorities of the several States.
 (7.) To pronounce sentence in all political matters which the
 States shall submit to their consideration.
 (8.) To define the law which shall be in force in the event of
 there existing any contradiction between the national Decrees,
 between the Decrees of the States and the national Decrees, or
between the laws of any of the States.
 
 994 
 
 994
 
 VENEZUELA.
 
 
 (9.) To settle differences resulting from contracts or negotiations
 entered into by the President of the Federation.
 (10.) To try cases of capture of prizes.
 (11.) To exercise all the other obligations prescribed by the law.
 CHAPTER VII.-Of the Court of Cassation.
 81. The Court of Cassation, to which paragraph 20, Article 13,
 of this Constitution refers, shall be the Tribunal of the States, and
 shall consist of as many members as there are States of the Federation. Such members shall occupy their seats during four years.
 82. The following qualifications are indispensable for the member-
 ship of this Court:-
 (1.) To be a barrister in exercise of his profession, and to possess
 a practice of at least six years' standing.
 (2.) To be of Venezuelan nationality, and have attained the age
 of 80 years.
 88. The Legislature of each State shall, every four years, form a
 list of as many lawyers, possessed of the foregoing qualifications, as
 there are States, and shall forward their respective lists duly certified
 to the Federal Council, who shall elect one member for each State
 for the formation of this High Court.
 84. When the Federal Council shall have obtained the nominations of all the States, they shall proceed, during a public Session, to
 make the aforesaid election, drawing up a list of those barristers
 who shall not have been appointed, in order that, from the general
 list published in the official Gazette, any absolute vacancy that
 may occur be filled up by drawing lots for the same. Any temporary vacancy shall be provided for in the manner prescribed by
 law,
 85. The Court of Cassation     shall carry out the following
 duties:-
 (1.) To proceed in criminal trials or charges of responsibility
 instituted against the high officials of the several States, applying
 the State laws in the case of responsibility; and, in the event of the
 non-promulgation of the law which shall be a precept of this Constitution, they shall make use in the trial they are conducting of the
 general code of national laws.
 (2.) To try, and pronounce sentence in matters of appeal to their
 judgment, in the terms and manner determined by law.
 (3.) To report annually to the National Legislature on the causes
 which shall preclude unanimity in matters of civil and criminal
 legislation.
 (4.) To decide all questions which may arise between the legal
 authorities and officials of the several States of the Federation
996                      VENEZUELA.
 whenever there shall not exist in the State or States in question any
 authority competent to settle the same.
 CHAPTER VIII.-Supplementary Dispositions.
 86. The national executive power shall be exercised by the
 Federal Council, the President of the United States of Venezuela,
 or his substitute, together with the Ministers of State, his mediums
 of communication.
 The candidate for the Presidency of the United States of
 Venezuela shall be of Venezuelan birth.
 87. The functions of the National Executive shall not be exercised beyond the limits of the Federal district, excepting in the
 cases provided for by clause (e), paragraph 10, Article 66 of this
 Constitution. When the President shall, with the sanction of the
 Federal Council, take up the command of the forces, or shall absent
 himself on public business from the Federal district, his place must
 be filled by a member of the Federal Council in accordance with
 Article 62 of this Constitution. During a similar absence the President shall be incapacitated from holding any other office.
 88. All that which, by this Constitution, is not expressly dele-
 gated or attributed to the General Government of the nation shall
 lie within the competency of the States.
 89. The Courts of Justice of the States are independent of each
 other. proceedings instituted before them shall terminate in the
 respective States; their sentences shall not be questioned, except by
 the Court of Cassation, in the cases determined by law.
 90. Any act of Congress or of the National Executive which
 should in any manner violate the right guaranteed to the States by
 this Constitution, or any resolution impairing their independence,
 shall be declared null and void by the High Federal Court whenever
 the majority of the Legislature shall so decide.
 91. The national forces shall consist of naval and land troops,
 and shall be formed by the citizen militia organized by the States
 according to law.
 92. The forces paid by the Federation shall consist of a contingent furnished by each State in proportion to the population
 of the Same, the contingent to be composed of the citizens of each
 State liable to be called on for military service in the manner pre-
 scribed by the internal State laws.
 93. In the event of war the contingent shall be increased by the
 addition of the corps of citizen militia until the number of men
 required by the National Government be reached.
 U-1. The National Government may dismiss the chiefs of the
 State contingents in the cases provided for, and with the forms
established the Military Statute; in the event of such an occurrence the National Government shall require the State to furnish
 substitutes for the same.
 95. Civil and military authority shall in no case be exercised by
 the same individual or corporate body.
 96. The nation being in possession of the right of ecclesiastical
 patronage, the same shall be exercised in accordance with the law
 regulating the matter.
 97. The Federal Government shall not appoint any officials
 possessed of jurisdiction or authority in the States beyond those
 pertaining to the same. The fiscal agents and the commanders of
 the forces garrisoning national strongholds, arsenals to be founded
 by law, naval stations and harbours opened to foreign commerce,
 are excepted from the above; and these persons shall only exercise
 their jurisdiction within the limits of their office and the precincts of the fortresses or barracks where they may be quartered,
 remaining, nevertheless, subject to the general laws of the State
 in which they shall reside.  All military stores existing in the
 States are the property of the National Government; the States
 shall, however, be permitted to acquire such as may be required for
 their internal defence.
 9S. The National Government shall not quarter troops or appoint
 commanders in any State without the permission of the same, even
 in the event of the troops belonging to the State in question.
 99. Neither the National Executive nor that of the States shall
 have the right of armed intervention in the internal differences of
 any State; they shall only tender their good offices to promote a
 peaceful solution of the conflict.
 100. In the event of the death, resignation, or dismissal of the
 President of the United States of Venezuela, the accession to office
 of the Acting President shall be immediately notified to the several
 States.
 101. The exportation of goods or produce from Venezuela shall
 be freed from contributions; no duties shall be imposed on the
 same.
 102. All usurped authority shall be invalid; any act emanating
 from  the same shall be null and void  of effect.  All results
 brought about by the direct or indirect intervention of an armed
 force, or by the subversive attitude of a popular meeting, are null
 and void.
 10'. No official or corporate body shall exercise authority which
 shall not have been conferred on them by this Constitution and the
 laws of the nation.
 104. Any citizen may bring an accusation against a Government
 or State official before the Chamber of Deputies, before his superiors,
 or before the authorities determined by law.
 
 997 
 
 
 105. The National Treasury shall not disburse any stun which
 shall not have been entered in the annual Budget of public expenditure voted by Congress. Those who shall violate this dis-
 position shall be liable to the National Treasury for the sums they
 shall have disbursed. Ordinary expenditure shall, in the Treasury
 payments, be preferred to extraordinary disbursements.
 106. The Departments for the collection of national taxes and
 those destined for the issue of divers sums shall be separate front
 each other. The former shall make no payments beyond the salaries
 of their officials.
 107. When, for any reasons, the budget of expenditure for a
 financial period shall not have been voted, the Estimates of the
 previous year shall remain in force.
 108. During the period of elections the National and State
 forces shall be confined to barracks as long as the poll remains
 open.
 109. The clause, " That all differences which may arise between
 the Contracting Parties shall be settled without resorting to war,
 by the decision of a friendly Power or Powers appointed as arbitrator," shall be inserted in all International Treaties of Friendship
 and Commerce.
 110. The seat of a member of Congress may not be occupied
 conjointly with a post in the gift of the National Executive. The
 acceptance of one of the latter is equivalent to resignation of the
 anterior appointment. National officials whose situations are not
 permanent vacate the same on their election as Senators or
 Deputies.
 111. The law shall create and appoint any other national
 tribunals which may be deemed necessary.
 112. Native officials shall not accept gifts, appointments,
 honours, or rewards at the hands of foreign nations without the
 previous authorization of the National Legislature.
 113. The forces have no deliberative voice; they are passive and
 obedient.  No armed force shall levy contributions, nor exact
 supplies of whatever nature, except from the civil authorities, and
 with the forms and in the manner prescribed by law.
 114. The nation and the States shall promote emigration and
 colonization from foreign countries, in accordance with the laws of
 those nations.
 115. A law shall define the manner in winch national officials on
 accession to office shall take the oath of faithful execution of their
 duties.
 116. The National Executive shall treat with the other Governments of America on the advisability of entering into Conventions
 of alliance or confederation.
 
117. The international law of nations shall form part of the
 national Legislative Code; the dictates of the former shall be
 especially enforced in the event of civil war. According to this
 precept war may be put an end to by Treaties between the belli-
 gerent nations or States, who shall bind themselves to respect the
 humane practices of Christian and civilized Powers, the guarantee
 of life remaining secured in every case.
 118. This Constitution shall be liable to a total or partial reform
 at the hands of the National Legislature, should the majority of the
 States petition for the same. The resolutions passed by the majority
 render such reform   obligatory, but the same shall not extend
 beyond the articles specified by the Petitions.
 119. This Constitution shall be in force from the date of the
 official promulgation of the same in the several States; the date of
 the Federation from the 20th February, 1859, and the date of the
 Law from the 28th March, 1861, shall be specified in all the public
 Acts and official documents.
 CHAPTER IX.-Transitory Resolutions.
 120. As soon as this Constitution shall have been published, the
 Great States shall proceed to hold elections for the appointment of
 Sectional Deputies to the Constituent Assembly, who shall sanction
 the local Constitution in harmony with the precepts established by
 this Constitution, and the laws which shall be enforced within the
 limits of each section.
 121. The Great States, having been constituted in the manner
 provided for by the foregoing Article, shall each elect a President and the prescribed number of Senators and Deputies for the
 National Legislature, in order that on the 20th February, 1882, the
 Legislative Power may be installed, whence shall be elected the
 Federal Council, who shall appoint the President of the United
 States of Venezuela in accordance with the dictate, of this Constitution.
 122. The new Constitutional term shall date from the 20th
 February, 1882, which date shall mark the conclusion of the previous
 period. All the appointments of the general administration shall
 date from the above-mentioned day.
 123. The census of the population approved on the 6th June,
 1874, shall be the basis of the civil and political acts of the Federation, until a reform of the same shall have taken place.
 124. The Federal Constitution sanctioned in 1874 shall be
 abrogated.
 Given and signed in the Palace of the Session of the Federal
 
 Legislative Body, in Caracas, on the 4th day of April, 1881, 18th
 year of the Law, and 23rd year of the Federation.
 NiicAwon BORGES, President of the Senate, Senator
 for the State of Bolivar.
 VICENTE AMENGUAL, President of the Chamber of
 Deputies, Deputy for the State of Bolivar.
 
 Federal Palace of Caracas, the 27th April, 1881, 18th year of the
 Law, 23rd year of the Federation.
 It is enacted, and let it be enacted.
 GUZMAN BLANCO.
 

