

Section I.
Of the Territory. 
Article 1. The States that the Constitution of March 28, 1864, declared independent and united to form the Venezuelan Federation, and that on April 27, 1881, were denominated Apure, Bolivar, Barquisimeto, Barcelona, Carabobo, Cojedes, Cumana, Falcon, Guzman Blanco, Guarico, Guayana, Guzman, Maturin, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora, and Zulia are constituted into nine grand political bodies, viz.: The State of Bermudez, composed of Barcelona, Cumana, and Maturin; the State of Miranda, composed of Bolivar, Guzman Blanco, Guarico, and Nueva Esparta; the State of Carabobo, composed of Carabobo and Nirgua; the State of Zamora, composed of Cojedes, Portuguesa, and Zamora; the State of Lara, composed of Barquisimeto and Yaracuy, except the department of Nirgua; the State of Los Andes, composed of Guzman, Trujillo, and Tachira; the State of Bolivar, composed of Guayana and Apure; the State of Zulia, and also the State of Falcon. And they are thus constituted to continue one only nation,. free, sovereign, and independent, under the title of the United States of Venezuela. 
Art. 2. The boundaries of these great States are determined by those that the law of April 28, 1856, that arranged the last territorial division, designated for the ancient provinces until it shall be reformed. 
Art. 3. The boundaries of the United States of the Venezuelan Federation are the same that in 1810 belonged to the old Captaincy-General of Venezuela.
Art. 4. The States that are grouped together to form the grand political bodies will be called Sections. These are equal among themselves; the Constitutions prescribed for their internal organism must be harmonious with the federative principles. established by the present compact, and the sovereignty not delegated resides in the State without any other limitations than those that devolve from the compromise of association.



Section II.
Of Venezuelans. 
Art. 5. These are Venezuelans viz.: First. All persons that may have been or may be born on Venezuelan soil, whatever may be the nationality of their parents. Second. The children of a Venezuelan father or mother that may have been born on foreign soil, if they should come to take up their domicile in the country and express the desire to become citizens. Third. Foreigners that may -have obtained -naturalization papers; and, Fourth. Those born or that shall be born in any of the Spanish-American republics or in the Spanish Antilles, provided that they may have taken up their residence in the territory of the Republic and express a willingness to become citizens. 
Art. 6. Those that take up their residence and acquire nationality in a foreign country do not lose the character of Venezuelans. 
Art. 7. Males over twenty-one years of age are qualified Venezuelan citizens, with only the exceptions contained in this Constitution. 
Art. 8. All Venezuelans are obliged to serve the nation according to the prescriptions of the laws, sacrificing his property and his life, if necessary, to defend the country. Art. 9. Venezuelans shall enjoy in all the States of the Union, the rights and immunities inherent to their condition as citizens of the Federation, and they shall also have imposed upon them there the same duties that are required of those that are natives or domiciled there. 
Art. 10. Foreigners shall enjoy the same civil rights as Venezuelans and the same security in their persons and property. They can only take advantage of diplomatic means in accordance with public treaties and in cases when right permits it. 
Art. 11. The law will determine the rights applicable to the condition of foreigners, according as they may be domiciled or in transit. 

TITLE II. 
Bases of the Union. 
Art 12. The States that form the Venezuelan Federation reciprocally recognize their respective autonomies; they are declared equal in political entity, and preserve, in all its plenitude, the sovereignty not expressly delegated in this Constitution. 
Art. 13. The States of the Venezuelan Federation oblige themselves: First. To organize themselves in accord with the principles of popular, elective, federal, representative, alternative and responsible government. Second. To establish the fundamental regulations of their interior regulation and government in entire conformity with the principles of this Constitution. Third. To defend themselves against all violence that threatens the sectional independence or the integrity of the Venezuelan Federation. Fourth. To not alienate to a foreign power any part of their territory, nor to implore its protection, nor to establish or cultivate political or diplomatic relations with other nations, since this last is reserved to the Federal power. Fifth. To not combine or ally themselves with another nation, nor to separate themselves to the prejudice of the nationality of Venezuela and her territory. Sixth. To cede to the nation the territory that may be necessary for the Federal district. Seventh. To cede to the Government of the Federation the territory necessary for the erection of forts, warehouses, shipyards, and penitentiaries, and for the construction of other edifices indispensable to the general administration. Eighth. To leave to the Government of the Federation the administration of the Amazonas and Goajira territories and that of the islands which pertain to the nation, until it may be convenient to elevate them to another rank. Ninth. To reserve to the powers of the Federation all legislative or executive jurisdiction concerning maritime, coastwise, and fluvial navigation, and the national roads, considering as such those that exceed the limits of a State and lead to the frontiers of others and to the Federal district. Tenth. To not subject to contributions the products or articles upon which national taxes are imposed, or those that are by law exempt from tax before they have been offered for consumption. Eleventh. To not impose contributions on cattle, effects, or any class of merchandise in transit for another State, in order that traffic may be absolutely free, and that in one section the consumption of others may not be taxed. Twelfth. To not prohibit the consumption of the products of other States nor to tax their productions with greater general or municipal taxes than those paid on products raised in the locality. Thirteenth. To not establish maritime or territorial customhouses for the collection of imports, since there will be national ones only. Fourteenth. To recognize the right of each State to dispose of its natural products. Fifteenth. To cede to the Government of the Federation the administration of mines public lands, and salt mines, in order that the first may be regulated by a system of uniform working and that the latter may be applied to the benefit of the people. Sixteenth. To respect the property, arsenals, and forts of the nation. Seventeenth. To comply with and cause to be complied with and executed the Constitution and laws of the Federation and the decrees and orders that the Federal power, the tribunals, and courts may expedite in use of their attributes and legal faculties. Eighteenth. To give entire faith to and to cause to be complied with and executed the public acts and judicial procedures of the other States. Nineteenth. To organize their tribunals and courts for the administration of justice in the State and to have for all of them the same substantive civil and criminal legislation and the same laws of civil and criminal procedure. Twentieth. To present judges for the Court of Appeals and to submit to the decision of this supreme tribunal of the States. Twenty-first. To incorporate the extradition of criminals as a political principle in their respective Constitutions. Twenty-second. To establish direct and public suffrage in popular elections, making it obligatory and endorsing it in the electoral registry. The vote of the suffragist must be cast in full and public session of the respective board; it will be inscribed in the registry books that the law prescribes for elections, which cannot be substituted in any other form, and the elector, for himself or by another at his request in case of impediment or through ignorance, will sign the memorandum entry of his vote, and without this requisite it cannot be claimed that in reality he has voted. Twenty-third. To establish a system of primary education and that of arts and trades. Twenty-fourth. To reserve to the powers of the Federation the laws and provisions necessary for the creation, conservation, and progress of general schools, colleges, or universities designed for the teaching of the sciences. Twenty-fifth. To not impose duties upon the national employees, except in the quality of citizens of the State and insomuch as these duties may not be incompatible with the national public service. Twenty-sixth. To furnish the proportional contingent that pertains to them to compose the national public forces in time of peace or war. Twenty-seventh. To not permit in the States of the Federation forced enlistments and levies that have or may have for their object an attack on liberty or independence or a disturbance of the public order of the Nation, of other States, or of another Nation. Twenty-eighth To preserve a strict neutrality in the contentions that may arise in other States. Twenty-ninth. To not declare or carry on war in any case, one State with another. Thirtieth. To defer and submit to the decision of the Congress or the High Federal Court in all the controversies that may arise between two or more States when they cannot, between themselves and by specific measures, arrive at an agreement. If, for any cause, they may not designate the arbiter to whose decision they may submit, they leave it, in fact, to the High Federal Court. Thirty-first. To recognize the competency of Congress and of the Court of Appeals to take cognizance of the causes that, for treason to the country or for the infraction of the Constitution and laws of the Federation, may be instituted against those that -exercise executive authority in the States, it being their duty to incorporate this precept in their Constitutions. In these trials the modes of procedure that the general laws prescribe will be followed, and they will be decided in consonance with those laws. Thirty-second. To have, as the just income of the States, two-thirds of the total product of the impost collected as transit tax in all the custom-houses of the republic and two-thirds of that collected from mines, public lands, and salt mines administered by the federal power, and to distribute this income among all the States of the federation in proportion to the population of each. Thirty-third. To reserve to the federal power the amount of the third part of the income from transit tax, the production of mines, public lands, and salt mines, to be invested in the improvement of the country. Thirty-fourth. To keep far away from the frontier those individuals that, through political motives, take refuge in a State, provided that the State interested requests it 

TITLE I. 
Guarantees of Venezuelans. 
Art. 14. The nation guarantees to Venezuelans: First. The inviolability. of life, capital punishment being abolished in spite of any law that establishes it. Second. Property, with all its attributes, rights and privileges, will only be subjected to contributions decreed by legislative authority, to judicial decision, and to be taken for public works after indemnity and condemnation. -Third. The inviolability and secrecy of correspondence and other private papers. Fourth. The domestic hearth, that cannot be approached except to prevent the perpetration of crime, and this itself must be done in accordance with law. Fifth. Personal liberty, and consequently (1) forced recruiting for armed service is abolished, (2) slavery is forever proscribed, (3) slaves that tread the soil of Venezuela are free, and (4) nobody is obliged to do that which the law does not command, nor is impeded from doing that which it does not prohibit. Sixth. The freedom of thought, expressed by word or through the press, is without any restriction to be submitted to previous censure. In cases of calumny or injury or prejudice to a third party, the aggrieved party shall have every facility to have his complaints investigated before competent tribunals of justice in accordance with the common laws. Seventh. The liberty of traveling without passport, to change the domicile, observing the legal formalities, and to depart from and return to the Republic, carrying off and bringing back his or her property. Eighth. The liberty of industry and consequently the proprietorship of discoveries and productions. The law will assign to the proprietors a temporary privilege or the mode of indemnity in case that the author agrees to its publication. Ninth. The liberty of reunion and assembling without arms, publicly or privately, the authorities being prohibited from exercising any act of inspection or coercion. Tenth. The liberty of petition, with the right of obtaining action by resolution; petition can be made by any functionary, authority or corporation. If the petition shall be made in the name of various persons, the first five will respond for the authenticity of the signatures and all for the truth of the assertions. Eleventh. The liberty of suffrage at popular elections without any restriction except to males under eighteen years of age. Twelfth. The liberty of instruction will be protected to every The public power is obliged to establish gratuitous extent. instruction in primary schools, the arts and trades. Thirteenth. Religious liberty. Fourteenth. Individual security, and, therefore (1) no Venezuelan can be imprisoned or arrested in punishment for debts not founded in fraud or crime; (2) nor to be obliged to lodge or quarter soldiers in his house; (3) nor to be judged by special commissions or tribunals, but by his natural judges and by virtue of laws dictated before the commission of the crime or act to be judged; (4) nor to be imprisoned nor arrested without previous summary information that a crime meriting corporal punishment has been committed, and a written order from the functionary that orders the imprisonment, stating the cause of arrest, unless the person may be caught in the commission of the crime, (5) nor to be placed in solitary confinement for any cause; (6) nor to be obliged to give evidence in criminal causes, against himself or his blood relations within the fourth degree of consanguinity or against his relations by marriage within the second degreE, or against husband or wife; (7) nor to remain in prison when the reasons that caused the imprisonment have been dissipated; (8) nor to be sentenced to corporal punishment for more than ten years; (10) nor to remain deprived of his liberty for political reasons when order is re-established. Art. 15. Equality: In virtue of which (1) all must be judged by the very same laws and subject to equal duty, service and contributions; (2) no titles of nobility, hereditary honors and distinctions will be conceded, nor employments o)r offices the salaries or emoluments of which continue after the termination of service; (3) no other official salutation than " citizen" and "you" will be given to employees and corporations. The present enumeration does not impose upon the States the obligation to accord other guarantees to their inhabitants. Art. 16. The laws in the States will prescribe penalties for the infractions of these guarantees, establishing modes of procedure to make them effective. Art. 17. Those who may issue, sign, or execute, or order executed any decrees, orders or resolutions that violate or in any manner infringe upon the guarantees accorded to Venezuelans are culpable and must be punished according to the law. Every citizen is empowered to bring charges. 

TITLE IV. 
Of the National Legislature. 
Section I. 
Art. 18. The national Legislature will be composed of two chambers, one of Senators and another of Deputies. Art. 19. The States will determine the mode of election of Deputies. Section II.-Of the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 20. To form the Chamber of Deputies, each State will name, by popular election in accordance with paragraph 22 of article 13 of this Constitution, one Deputy for each thirty-five thousand inhabitants and another for an excess not under fifteen thousand. In the same manner it will elect alternates in equal number to the principals. 
Art. 21. The Deputies will hold office for four years, when they will be renewed in their entirety. 
Art. 22. The prerogatives of the Chamber of Deputies are: First, to examine the annual account that the President of the United States of Venezuela must render; second, to pass a vote of censure of the Ministers of the Cabinet, in which event their posts will be vacant; third, to hear charges against the persons in charge of the office of the national executive for treason to the country, for infraction of the Constitution, or for ordinary crimes; against the ministers and other national employees for infraction of the Constitution and laws, and for fault in the discharge of their duties according to article 75 of this Constitution and of the general laws of the republic. This attribute is preventative and neither contracts nor diminishes those that other authorities have to judge and punish. 
Art. 23. When a charge is instituted by a Deputy or by any corporation or individual the following rules will be observed: (1) There will be appointed, in secret session, a commission of three Deputies; (2) the commission will, within three days, render an opinion, declaring whether or not there is foundation for instituting a cause; (3) the chamber will consider the information and decide upon the cause by the vote of an absolute majority of the members present, the accusing Deputy abstaining from voting. Art. 24. The declaration that there is foundation for the cause operates to suspend from office the accused and incapacitates him for the discharge of any public function during the trial. Section III.-Of the Chamber of the Senate. 
Art. 25. To form this chamber each State, through its respective Legislature, will elect three principal Senators and an equal number of alternates to supply the vacancies that may occur. 
Art. 26. To be a Senator it is required that he shall be a Venezuelan by birth and thirty years of age. Art. 27. The Senators will occupy their posts for four years and be renewed in their entirety. 
Art. 28. It is the prerogative of the Senate to substantiate and decide the causes initiated in the Chamber of Deputies. 
Art. 29. If the cause may not have been concluded during the sessions, the Senate will continue assembled for this purpose only until the cause is finished. Section IV.-Dispositions of the Chambers in Common. 
Art. 30. The national Legislature will assemble on the twentieth day of February of each year, or as soon thereafter as possible, at the capital of the United States without the necessity of previous notice. The sessions will last for seventy days, to be prolonged until ninety days at the judgment of the majority. 
Art. 31. The chambers will open their sessions with two. thirds of their number at least; and, in default of this number, those present will assemble in preparatory commission and adopt measures for the concurrence of the absentees. 
Art. 32. The sessions having been opened, they may be continued by two-thirds of those that may have installed them, provided that the number be not less than half of all the members elected. 
Art. 33. Although the chambers deliberate separately, they may assemble together in the Congress when the Constitution and laws provide for it, or when one of the two chambers may deem it necessary. If the chamber that is invited shall agree it remains to it to fix the day and the hour of the joint session. Art. 34. The sessions will be public and secret at the will of the chamber. 
Art. 35. The chambers have the right: (1) To make rules to be observed in the sessions and to regulate the debates; (2) to correct infractors; (3) to establish the police force in the hall of sessions; (4) to punish or correct spectators who create disorder; (5) to remove the obstacles to the free exercise of their functions; (6) to command the execution of their private resolutions; (7) to judge of the qualifications of their members and to consider their resignations. 
Art. 36. One of the Chambers cannot suspend its sessions, nor change its place of meeting without the consent of the other; in case of disagreement they will reassemble together and execute that which the majority resolves. 
Art. 37. The exercise of any other public function, during the sessions, is incompatible with those of a Senator or Deputy. The law will specify the remunerations that the members of the national Legislature shall receive for their services. And whenever an increase of said remunerations is decreed, the law that sanctions it will not begin to be in force until the following period when the Chambers that sanctioned it shall have been renewed in their entirety. 
Art. 38. The Senators and Deputies shall enjoy immunity from the twentieth day of January of each year until thirty days after the close of the sessions and this consists in the suspension of all civil or criminal proceeding, whatever may be its origin or nature; when anyone shall perpetrate an act that merits corporal punishment the investigation shall continue until the end of the summing up and shall remain in this state while the term of immunity continues. 
Art. 39. The Congress will be presided over by the President of the Senate and the presiding officer of the Chamber of Deputies will act as Vice-President. 
Art. 40. The members of the chambers are not responsible for the opinions they express or the discourses they pronounce in session. 
Art. 41. Senators and Deputies that accept office or commission from the national executive thereby leave vacant the posts of legislators in the chambers to which they were elected. 
Art. 42. Nor can Senators and Deputies make contracts with the general Government or conduct the prosecution of claims of others against it. 
Section V.-Prerogatives of the National Legislature. 
Art. 43. The National Legislature has the following prerogatives: (1) to dissolve the controversies that may arise between two or more States; (2) to locate the Federal District in an unpopulated territory not exceeding three miles square, where will be constructed the capital city of the Republic. This district will be neutral territory, and no other elections will be there held than those that the law determines for the locality. The district will be provisionally that which the constituent assembly designated or that which the National Legislature may designate; (3) to organize everything relating to the customhouses, whose income will constitute the treasure of the Union until these incomes are supplied from other sources; (4) to dispose in everything relating to the habitation and security of ports and sea coasts; (5) to create and organize the postal service and to fix the charges for transportation of correspondence; (6) to form the National Codes in accordance with paragraph 19, article 13 of this Constitution; (7) to fix the value type law, weight and coinage of national money; (8) to designate the coat-of-arms and the national flag which will be the same for all the States; (9) to create, abolish and fix salaries for national offices; (10) to determine everything in relation to the national debt; (11) to contract loans upon the credit of the nation: (12), to dictate necessary measures to perfect the census of the current population and the national statistics; (13) to annually fix the armed forces by sea and land and to dictate the army regulations; (14) to decree rules for the formation and substitution of the forces referred to in the preceding clause; (15) to "declare war and to require the National Executive to negotiate peace; (16) to ratify or reject the contracts for national public works made by the President with the approval of the Federal Council, without which requisite they will not be carried into effect; (18) to annually fix the estimates for public expenses; ,(19) to promote whatever conduces to the prosperity of the -country and to its advancement in the general knowledge of the arts and sciences; (20) to fix and regulate the national weights and measures; (21) to grant amnesties; (22) to establish, under the names of territories, special regulations for the government of regions inhabited by unconquered and uncivilized Indians. Such territories will be under the immediate supervision of the Executive of the Union; (23) to establish the modes of procedure and to designate the penalties to be imposed by the Senate in the trials originated in the Chamber of Deputies; (24) to increase the basis of population for the election of Deputies; (25) to permit or refuse the admission of foreigners into the service of the Republic; (26) to make laws in respect to retirements from the military service and army pensions; (27) to dictate the law of responsibility on the part of all national employees and those of the States for infraction of the Constitution and the general laws of the Union; (28) to determine the mode of conceding military rank or promotion; (29) to elect the Federal Council provided for in this Constitution and to convoke the alternates of the Senators and Deputies who may have been chosen for it. 
Art. 44. Besides the preceding enumeration the National Legislature may pass such laws of general character as may be necessary, but in no case can they be promulgated, much less executed, if they conflict with this Constitution, which defines the prerogatives of the public powers in Venezuela. Section VI.-Of the Making of Laws. 
Art. 45. The laws and decrees of the National Legislature may be proposed by the members of either chamber, provided that the respective projects are conformed to the rules established for the Parliament of Venezuela.

Art. 46. After a project may have been presented, it will be read and considered in order to be admitted; and if it is, it must undergo three discussions, with an interval of at least one day between each, observing the rules established for debate. 
Art. 47. The projects approved in the chamber in which they were originated will be passed to the other for the purposes indicated in the preceding article, and if they are not rejected they will be returned to the chamber whence they originated, with the amendments they may have undergone. 
Art. 48. If the chamber of their origin does not agree to the amendments, it may insist and send its written reasons to the other. They may also assemble together in Congress and deliberate, in general commission, over the mode of agreement, but if this cannot be reached, the project will be of no effect after the chamber of its origin separately decides upon the ratification of its insistence. 
Art. 49. Upon the passing of the projects from one to the other chamber, the days on which they have been discussed will be stated. 
Art. 50. The law reforming another law must be fully engrossed and the former law, in all its parts, will be annulled. 
Art. 51. In the laws this form will be used: "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees." Art. 52. The projects defeated in one Legislature cannot be reintroduced except in another. 
Art. 53. The projects pending in a chamber at the close of the sessions must undergo the same three discussions in succeeding legislatures. 
Art. 54. Laws are annulled with the same formalities established for their sanction. 
Art. 55. When the ministers of Cabinet may have sustained, in a chamber, the unconstitutionality of a project by word or in writing, and notwithstanding this, it may have been sanctioned as law, the National Executive, with the affirmative vote of the Federal Council, will suspend its execution and apply to the legislatures of the States, asking their vote in the matter. Art. 56. In case of the foregoing article, each State will represent one vote expressed by the majority of the members of the legislature present, and the result will be sent to the High Federal Court in this form: "I confirm" or "I reject." Art. 57. If a majority of the legislatures of the States agree with the Federal Executive, the High Federal Court will confirm the suspension, and the Federal Executive himself will render an account to the next Congress relative to all that has been done in the matter. 
Art. 58. The laws will not be observed until after being published in the solemn form established. 
Art. 59. The faculty conceded to sanction a law is not to be delegated. 
Art. 60. No legislative disposition will have a retroactive -effect, except in matters of judicial procedure and that which imposes a lighter penalty. 

TITLE V. 
Of the General Power of the Federation. 
Art. 61. There will be a Federal Council composed of one senator and one deputy for each State and of one more deputy for the Federal District, who will be elected by the Congress each two years from among the respective representations of the States composing the Federation and from that of the Federal District. This election will take place in the first fifteen days of the meeting of Congress, in the first and third year of the constitutional period. 
Art. 62. The Federal Council elects from its members the President of the United States of Venezuela, and in the same manner the person who shall act in his stead in case of his temporal or permanent disability during his term. The election of a person to be President of the United States of Venezuela who is not a member of the Federal Council, as well as of those who may have to act in his stead in case of his temporal or permanent disability, is null of right and void of efficacy. 
Art. 63. The members of the Federal Council hold Office for two years, the same as the President of the United states of Venezuela, whose term is of equal duration; and neither he nor they can be re-elected for the term immediately succeeding, although they may return to occupy their posts as legislators in the chambers to which they belong. 
Art 64. The Federal Council resides in the district and exercises the functions prescribed in this Constitution. It cannot deliberate with less than an absolute majority of all its members: it dictates the interior regulations to be observed in its deliberations, and annually appoints the person who shall preside over its sessions.



Section I.

Art. 65. The prerogatives of the President of Venezuela are: (1) To appoint and remove the cabinet ministers; (2) to preside over the cabinet, in whose discussions he will have a vote, and to inform the Council of all the matters that refer to the General Administration; (3)to receive and welcome public ministers; (4) to sign the official letters to the Sovereigns or residents of other countries; (5) to order the execution of the laws and decrees of the National Legislature, and to take care that they are complied with and executed; (6) to promulgate the resolutions and decrees that may have been proposed and received the approbation of the Federal Council, in conformity with article 66 of this Constitution; (7) to organize the Federal District and to act therein as the chief civil and political authority established by this Constitution; (8) to issue registers of navigation to national vessels; (9) to render an account to Congress, within the first eight days of its annual session, of the cases in which, with the approval of the Federal Council, he may have exercised all or any of the faculties accorded to him in article 66 of this compact; (10) to discharge the other functions that the national laws intrust to him. 
Art. 66. Besides the foregoing prerogatives that are personal to the President of the United States of Venezuela, he can, with the deliberate vote of the Federal Council, exercise the following: (1) To protect the nation from all exterior attack; (2) To administer the public lands, mines and salt mines of the states ab their delegate; (3) to convoke the National Legislature in its regular sessions, and in extraordinary session when the gravity of any subject demands it; (4) to nominate persons for diplomatic positions, consuls-general, and consuls. those named for the first and second positions must be Venezuelans by birth; (5) to direct negotiations and celebrate all kinds of treaties with other nations, submitting these to the National Legislature; (6) to celebrate contracts of national interest in accordance with the laws and submit them to the legislatures for their approval; 7) to nominate the employees of hacienda, which nominations are not to be made by any other authority. It is required that these employees shall be Venezuelans by birth; (8) to remove and suspend employees of his own free motion, ordering them to be tried if there should be cause for it; (9) to declare war in the name of the Republic when Congress shall have decreed it; (10) in the case of foreign war he can, first, demand from the States the assistance necessary for the national defense; second, require, in anticipation, the contributions and negotiate the loans decreed by the National Legislature; third, arrest or expel persons who pertain to the nation with which war is carried on and who may be opposed to the defense of the country; fourth, to suspend the guarantees that may be incompatible with the defense of the country, except that of life; fifth, to select the place to which the General Power of the Federation may be provisionally translated when there may be grave reasons for it; sixth, to bring to trial for treason to the country those Venezuelans who may be, in any manner, hostile to the national defense; seventh, to issue registers to corsairs and privateers and to prescribe the laws that they must observe in cases of capture; (11) to employ the public force and the powers contained in numbers 1, 2 and 5 of the preceding clause with the object of re-establishing constitutional order in case of armed insurrection against the institutions of the nation; (12) to dispose of the public force for the purpose of quelling every armed collision between two or more States, requiring them to lay down their arms and submit their controversies to the arbitration to which they are pledged by number 30, article 14 of this Constitution; (13) to direct the war and to appoint the person who shall command the army; (14) to organize the national force in time of peace; (15) to concede general or particular exemptions; (16) to defend the territory designated for the Federal District when there may be reasons to apprehend that it will be invaded by hostile forces. Section Ii.-Of the Cabinet Ministers. Art. 67. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall have the ministers for his cabinet that the law designates. It will determine their functions and duties and will organize their bureaus. Art. 68. To be a minister of the cabinet it is required that the person shall be twenty-five years of age, a Venezuelan by birth or five years of naturalization. A.,. 69. The ministers are the natural and proper organs of the President of the United States of Venezuela. All his acts must be subscribed by them and without such requisite they

will not be complied with nor executed by the authorities, employees, or private persons. 
Art. 70. All the acts of the ministers must be conformed to this Constitution and the laws; their personal responsibility is not saved, although they may have the written order of the President. 
Art. 71. The settlement of all business, except the fiscal affairs of the bureaus, will be determined in the council of ministers, and their responsibility is collective and consolidated . 
Art. 72. The ministers, within the five first sessions of each year, will render an account to the Chambers of what they may have done or propose to do in their respective branches. They will also render written or verbal reports that. may be requested of them, reserving only that which, in diplomatic affairs, it may not be convenient to publish. 
Art. 73. Within the same period, they will present to the National Legislature the estimates of public expenditures and the general account of the past year. 
Art. 74. The ministers have the right to be heard in the chambers, and are obliged to attend when they may be called upon for information. 
Art. 75. The ministers are responsible: (1) For treason to the country; (2) for infraction of this Constitution or the laws; (3) for malversation of the public funds; (4) for exceeding the estimates in their expenditures; (5) for subordination or bribery in the affairs under their charge or in the nominations for public employees; (6) for failure in compliance with the decisions of the Federal Council. 

TITLE VI.

Of the High Federal Court.

Section I.-Of its Organization. 
Art. 76. The High Federal Court will be composed of as many judges as there may be States of the federation and with the following qualities: (1) A judge must be a Venezuelan by birth; (2) he must be thirty years of age. 
Art. 77. For the nomination of judges of the High Federal Court the Congress will convene on the fifteenth day of its regular sessions and will proceed to group together the representation of each State from which to form a list of as many candidates for principal judges and an equal number of alternates  as there may be States of the Federation. The Congress, in the same or following session, will elect one principal and one alternate for each State, selecting them from the respective list. 
Art. 78. The law will determine the different functions of the judges and other officers of the High Federal Court. 
Art 79. The judges and their respect. 12 alternates will hold office for four years. The principals and their alternates in office cannot accept during this period any office in the gift of the executive without previous resignation and lawful acceptance. The infraction of this disposition will be punished with four years of disability to hold public office in Venezuela. 

Section II.- 
Prerogatives of the High Federal Court. 
Art. 80. The matters within the competence of the High Federal Court are: (1) To take cognizance of civil or criminal causes that may be instituted against diplomatic officers in those cases permitted by the law of nations; (2) to take cognisance of causes ordered by the President to be instituted against cabinet ministers when they may be accused according to the cases provided for in this Constitution. In the matter of the necessity of suspension from office, they will request the President to that effect and he will comply; (4) to have jurisdiction of the causes of responsibility instituted against diplomatic agents accredited to another nation for the wrong discharge of their functions; (5) to have jurisdiction in civil trials when the nation is defendant and the law sanctions it; (6) to dissipate the controversies that may arise between the officials of different States in political order in the matter of jurisdiction or competence; (7) to take cognizance of all matters of political nature that the States desire to submit for their consideration; (8) to declare which may be the law in force when the national and State laws may be found to conflict with each other; (9) to have jurisdiction in the controversies that may result from contracts or negotiations celebrated by the President of the federation; (10) to have jurisdiction in causes of imprisonment; (11) to exercise other prerogatives provided for by law. 

TITLE VII. 
Of the Court of Appeals. 
Art. 81. The Court of Appeals referred to in paragraph 20, article 13 of this Constitution, is the tribunal of the States; it will be composed of as many judges as there are States of the federation, and their terms of office will last for four years.
Art. 82. A judge of the Court of Appeals must have the following qualifications: (1) He must be an attorney at law in the exercise of his profession, and must have had at least six years practice; (2) he must be a Venezuelan, thirty years of age. 
Art. 83. Every four years the legislature of each State will form a list of as many attorneys, with the qualifications expressed in the preceding article, as there are States, and will remit it, duly certified, to the Federal Council in order that this body, from the respective lists, may select a judge for each State in the organization of this high tribunal. 
Art. 84. After the Federal Council may have received the lists from all the States, it will proceed, in public session, to verify the election; forming thereafter a list of the attorneys not elected, in order that from this general list, which will be published in the official paper, the permanent vacancies that may occur in the Court of Appeals may be filled by lot. The temporary vacancies will be filled according to law. 
Art. 85. The Court of Appeals will have the following prerogatives: (1) To take cognizance of criminal causes or those of responsibility that may be instituted against the high functionaries of the different States, applying the laws of the States themselves in matters of responsibility, and in case of omission of the promulgation of a law of constitutional precept, it will apply to the cause in question the general laws of the land; (2) to take cognizance and to decide in cases of appeal in the form and terms directed by law; (3) to annually report to the National Legislature the difficulties that stand in the way of uniformity in the matter of civil or criminal legislation; (4) to dispose of the rivalries that may arise between the officers or functionaries of judicial order in the different States of the federation and amongst those of a single State, provided that the authority to settle them does not exist in the State. 

TITLE VIII.

Complemental Regulations.



Art. 86. The national executive is exercised by the Federal Council, the President of the United States of Venezuela, or the person who fills his vacancies, in union with the cabinet ministers who are his organs.The President of Venezuela must be a Venezuelan by birth. 
Art. 87. The functions of national executive cannot be exercised outside of the federal district except in the case provided for in number 5, paragraph 10, article 66 of the Constitution. When the President, with the approval of the Council, shall take command of the army or absent himself from the district on account of matters of public interest that demand it, he cannot exercise any functions and will be replaced by the Federal Council in accordance with article 62 of this Constitution. 
Art. 88. Everything that may not be expressly assigned to the general administration of the nation in this Constitution is reserved to the States. 
Art. 89. The tribunals of justice in the States are independent; the causes originated in them will be concluded in the same States without any other review than that of the Court of Appeals in the cases provided for by law. 
Art. 90. Every act of Congress and of the national executive that violates the rights guaranteed to the States in this Constitution, or that attacks their independence, must be declared of no effect by the High Court, provided that a majority of the legislatures demands it. 
Art. 91. The public national force is divided into naval and land troops, and will be composed of the citizen militia that the States may organize according to law. 
Art. 92. The force at the disposal of the federation will be organized from citizens of a contingent furnished by each State in proportion to its population, calling to service those citizens that should render it according to their internal laws. 
Art. 93. In case of war the contingent can be augmented by bodies of citizen militia up to the number of men necessary to fill the draft of the national government. 
Art. 94. The national government may change the commanders of the public force supplied by the States in the cases and with the formalities provided for in the national military law and then their successors will be called for from the States. Art. 95. The military and civil authority can never be exercised by the same person or corporation. Art. 96. The nation, being in possession of the right of ecclesiastical patronage, will exercise it as the law upon the subject may direct.

Art. 97. The government of the federation will have no other resident employees with jurisdiction or authority in the States than those of the States themselves. The officers of hacienda, those of the forces that garrison national forces, arsenals created by law, navy-yards, and habilitated ports, that only have jurisdiction in matters peculiar to their respective offices and within the limits of the forts and quarters that they command, are excepted; but even these must be subject to the general laws of the State in which they reside. All the elements of war now existing belong to the national government; nevertheless it is not to be understood that the States are prohibited from acquiring those that they may need for domestic defense. 
Art. 98. The national government cannot station troops nor military officers with command in a State, although they may be from that or another State, without permission of the government of the State in which the force is to be stationed. 
Art. 99. Neither the National Executive nor those of the States can resort to armed intervention in the domestic contentions of a State; it is only permitted to them to tender their good offices to bring about a pacific solution in the case. 
Art. 100. In case of a permanent or temporary vacancy in the office of President of the United States of Venezuela, the States will be immediately informed as to who has supplied the vacancy. 
Art. 101. Exportation in Venezuela is free and no duty can be placed upon it. 
Art. 102. All usurped authority is without effect and its acts are null. Every order granted for a requisition, direct or indirect, by armed force or by an assemblage of people in subversive attitude is null of right and void of efficacy. 
Art. 103. The exercise of any function not conferred by the Constitution or laws is prohibited to every corporation or authority. 
Art 104. Any citizen may accuse the employees of the nation or the States before the chamber of deputies, before their respective superiors in office, or before the authorities designated by law. 
Art. 105. No payment shall be made from the National Treasury for which Congress has not expressly provided in the annual estimate, and those that may infringe this rule will be civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the sums they have paid out. In every payment from the public Treasury the ordinary expenses will be preferred to the extraordinary charges.

Art. 106. The offices of collection and disbursement of the national taxes shall be always separate, and the officers of collection may disburse only the salaries of their respective employees. 
Art. 107. When, for any reason, the estimate of appropriations for a fiscal period have not been made, that of the immediately preceding period will continue in force. 
Art. 108. In time of elections, the public national force or that of the States themselves will remain closely quartered during the holding of popular elections. 
Art. 109. In international treaties of commerce and friendship this clause will be inserted to wit: "All the disagreements between the contracting parties must be decided without an appeal to war, by the decision of a power or friendly powers." 
Art. 110. No individual can hold more than one office within the gift of Congress and the National Executive. The acceptances of any other is equivalent to resignation of the first. Officials that are removable will cease to hold office upon accepting the charge of a Senator or Deputy when they are dependents of the national executive. 
Art. 111. The law will create and designate other national tribunals that may be necessary. 
Art. 112. National officers cannot accept gifts, commissions, honors or emoluments from a foreign nation without permission from the National Legislature. 
Art. 113. Armed force cannot deliberate; it is passive and obedient. No armed body can make requisitions nor demand assistance of any kind, but from the civil authorities and in the mode and form prescribed by law. 
Art. 114. The nation and the States will promote foreign immigration and colonization in accordance with their respective laws. 
Art. 115. A law will regulate the manner in which national officers, upon taking charge of their posts, shall take the oath to comply with their duties. 
Art. 116. The national executive will negotiate with the governments of America over treaties of alliance or confederation. 
Art. 117. The law of nations forms a part of the national legislation; its dispositions will be specially in force in cases of civil war, which can be terminated by treaties between the belligerents who will have to respect the humanitarian customs of Christians and civilized nations, the guarantee of life being, in every case, inviolable. 
Art. 118. This Constitution can be reformed by the national Legislature if the legislatures of the States desire it, but there shall never be any reform except in the parts upon which the majority of the States coincide; also a reform can be made upon one or more points when two-thirds of the members of the National Legislature, deliberating separately and by the proceedings established to sanction the laws, shall accord it; but, in this second case, the amendment voted shall be submitted to the legislatures of the States, and it will stand sanctioned in the point or points that may have been ratified by them. Art. 119. This Constitution will take effect from the day of its official promulgation in each State, and in all public acts and official documents there will be cited the date of the Federation to begin with February 20, 1859, and the date of the law to begin with March 28, 1864. 
Art. 120. The constitutional period for the offices of the general administration of the Republic will continue to be computed from February 20, 1882, the date on which the reformed Constitution took effect. Art. 121. For every act of civil and political life of the States of the Federation, its basis of population is that which is determined in the last census approved by the National Legislature. 
Art. 122. The Federal Constitution of April 27, 1881, is repealed. Done in Caracas, in the Palace of the Federal Legislative Corps, and sealed with the seal of Congress on the 9th day of April, 1891. The 28th year of the Law and the 33d year of the Federation. 

