CONSTITUTION of the United States of Venezuela - Caracas, May 27, 1874

THE Congress of the United States of Venezuela, with the aid of the Supreme Author and Legislator of the Universe, and with the authority of the people of Venezuela, as manifested in the anxious desire which the Legislatures of the 20 States comprising the Venezuelan Union have expressed, requesting the reform of the Constitution of 1864, decreed by the Constituent Assembly of the States, and in conformity with Article 122, decrees:-

CHAPTER I-The Nation

Section 1. Concerning the Territory. 

ART. 1. The States which the Constitution of the 28th of March, 1864 declared independent and united for the formation of the Venezuelan Federation, and which now are called Apure, Bolivar, Barquisimeto, Barcelona, Carabobo, Cumaná, Cojédes, Falcon, Guzman Blauco, Guárico, Guayana, Guzman, Maturin, Nueva Espaita, Portuguesa, Táchira, Trujillo, Taracuy, Zamora, and Zulia, engage to continue to form one nation, independent and sovereign, under the name of the United States of Venezuela.

2. The boundaries of each State shall be those which the Law of April 28, 1856, which fixed the latest division of territory, indicated to the Provinces. 
3. The boundaries of the United States which compose the Venezuelan Federation are the same which in 1810 corresponded to the former Captaincy-General of Venezuela. 
4. The political entities mentioned in Article 1 reserve to themselves the power to unite two or more of them together, with the view of forming one State, but always reserving the power of resuming their character of a State. In either case they shall inform the National Executive, the Congress, and the other States of the Union. 

5. The States which may have availed themselves of the powers contained in the previous Article shall preserve their votes for the Presidency of the United States, for the nomination of Senators, and for the presentation of voters for the High Federal Court. 

Section 2. Concerning the Venezuelans. 

6. Are Venezuelans-
(1.) All those persons who may have been born or shall be born in the Venezuelan territory, whatever be the nationality of their parents. (2.) The sons of Venezuelan mothers or fathers who may have been born in another territory, if they shall come and domicile themselves in the country and desire to be so (of the Venezuelan nationality). 
(3.) Foreigners who may have obtained letters of naturalization; and (4.) Those who have been or may be born in any of the Spanish American Republics, or in the Spanish Antilles, always assuming that they may have fixed their residence in the territory and desire to adopt the Venezuelan nationality. 

7. Venezuelans who fix their domicile and acquire nationality in a foreign country do not lose their Venezuelan nationality. 

8. Venezuelans being males are eligible and of age at 21 years, with the exceptions contained in the Constitution. 9. All Venezuelans are bound in duty to serve the nation as the laws may prescribe, making the sacrifice of their property and of their lives if necessary for the defence of the country. 10. Venezuelans in the territory of any State (of the Union) possess the same duties and rights as those domiciled there. 11. A law will settle the rights which attach to the position of the foreigner. 

CHAPTER II. Bases of the Union. 
12. The States which form the Venezuelan Union recognize their respective autonomy; they proclaim their equality as politician entities, and retain in all its plenitude the sovereignty not expressly attributed by this Constitution. 

13. The said States agree to protect each other from any attempt at coercion which would imperil their independence or the integrity of the Union; they hind themselves to establish the fundamental laws of the government of the Union and internal administration, for which reasons they engage- 
(1.) To constitute themselves in accordance with the principles of popular, elective, federal, representative, alternate, and responsible government, and in consequence the superior officials whom they may appoint for their internal government, both Legislative and Executive, shall necessarily be elected by popular vote, and their term of office shall not exceed two years, neither shall those who exercise executive power or their deputies be re-eligible for the immediate term of office, neither can they be replaced by relations, up to the fourth degree, inclusive of consanguinity or civil affinity. 

(2.) Not to alienate to a foreign Power any portion of their territory, nor to implore its protection. 
(3.) To grant to the nation the territory which may be required for the formation of the Federal district. 
(4.) Not to limit by the imposition of taxes, or in any other manner, the navigation of those rivers and other navigable waters which do not require artificial channels. 
(5.) Not to levy contributions on produce taxed by the nation previous to its having been offered to the public for consumption.
(6.) Not to impose ditties on effects and merchandize in transit for another State. 
(7.) Not to exact service from the officials of the nation except in their capacity of members of the State, and only in so far as such duties shall not be incompatible with the national public service. 
(8.) To defer and submit to the decision of the Congress, National Executive, or High Federal Court, all differences which may arise between two or more States, in cases when they are unable to arrive at a peaceful solution; in no case, however, may one State declare or wage war against another. If for any motive they do not appoint an arbitrator to whose decision they agree to submit, they remain, ipso facto, Subject to that of the Congress. 
(9.) To maintain strict neutrality in the disputes which may occur in other States. 
(10.) Not to join or become allied to any other nation, nor to separate, impairing the nationality of Venezuela and her territory. (11.) To carry out and cause to be carried out and executed the Constitution and laws of the Union, the decrees and orders which

the National Executive, the Tribunals, and Courts of Justice of the Union may issue in the exercise of their attributes. (12.) To lay down the extradition of criminals as a political principle of their respective constitutions. 
(13.) To detain at a distance from the frontier those individuals who, from political causes, have taken refuge in the State, whenever the State concerned should require the same. 
(14.) Not to establish Custom-houses for the collection of dues, for there shall only exist National (Federal) Custom-houses. 
(15.) Not to permit, in the States of the Union, crimping, or levies of men, for the object of attacking the liberty or independence, or of disturbing the public order of any other Slate's or nations.
(16.) To yield to each State the unrestricted administration of their natural produce. In consequence those who possess salt mines shall manage them uncontrolled by the General Government. 
(17.) To set aside from the national revenue the sum of 16,000 Venezolanos, for the benefit of those States who do not possess mines in working condition, the Bum to be entered in the annual budget of public expenditure, and paid quarterly in advance.
(18.) To furnish their respective contingent for the formation of the national forces in times of war or peace. 
(19.) Not to prohibit the consumption of the produce of other States, nor to impose differential duties on the same. 
(20.) To relinquish to the Government of the Union the unrestrained control of the territories of the Amazon and Goagira until they should elect to enter into the number of the States.

(21.) To respect the town property, arsenals, and fortresses which may belong to the nation. 
(22.) To obtain for all a similar substantive Legislature, both civil and criminal. 
(23.) To establish in the popular elections direct, public, written suffrage, signed by the voter, or by a citizen authorized to do so by the same, in presence or the committee presiding over the election while the votes are being taken, a term of 30 days being fixed for inscription, and eight days (including two Sundays) for recording the votes. 
(24.) To recognize the competency of the National Congress and the High Federal Court for the trial of cases of treason against the country, or infringement of the Constitution or general laws of the Republic, which may have been committed by those exercising executive authority in the States, these agreeing to register this precept in their respective constitutions. The cases will be judged according to the procedure enacted by the laws of the nation.
CHAPTER III. Guarantees of the Venezuelans. 
14. The nation secures to Venezuelans- (1.) The inviolability of life, capital punishment being abolished, whatever law may have decreed the same. (2.) The possession of properly, and all rights pertaining to the same, subject only to the taxes imposed by the Legislative Authority, judicial sentences, and expropriation for public works, compensation being accorded by a contrary sentence. (3.) Inviolability and secrecy of correspondence, and other papers. (4.) The inviolability of domicile, which may not be entered by force under a search warrant, except to prevent the perpetration of crime, according to law. 
(5.) Personal liberty, therefore-a. Forced recruiting for military service is abolished ; b. Slavery is proscribed for ever; c. Slaves putting foot on Venezuelan territory are free; d. Liberty of action is guaranteed to all, in so far as no injury to others accrues therefrom. (6.) Unrestricted liberty of thought, whether expressed by word of mouth or by means of the press. (7.) The faculty of traveling without a passport, of changing their place of residence, complying with the legal forms established in the State, of absenting themselves from and returning to the Republic, carrying away and bringing back their property. (8.) The liberty of trade, and in consequence the proprietorship of discoveries or productions. The law secures to the owner a temporary privilege or a mode of compensation, should the author agree to publish the same. (9.) The unrestricted right of unarmed public or private assembly and association, the right of inspection being denied to the Government authorities. (10.) The privilege of petition and the right of obtaining redress. The petition may be brought before any corporation, authority, or Government official. Should the petition bear several signatures, the first five will answer for the authenticity of the remaining signatures, and all are responsible for the truth of the facts alleged. (11.) Liberty of suffrage for the popular elections without other restrictions than that of being less than 18 years of age. (12.) Liberty of instruction, which shall be protected to the fullest extent. The National Government undertakes to establish gratuitous primary and professional education. 
(13.) Religious liberty, but the Roman Catholic and Apostolic religion alone will be allowed to hold services outside the churches. (14.) Individual security, and therefore- 
a. No Venezuelan may be arrested or imprisoned for debt other than that resulting from fraud or crime ; b. They shall not be compelled to receive soldiers, either quartered or billeted, in their domicile; c. Neither may they be tried by special tribunals or commissions, but by the usual Judges pursuant to laws enacted before the crime or act to be tried bad taken place; d. Neither may they be arrested or imprisoned previous to a summary judicial inquiry into any transgression of the law deserving imprisonment being made, besides a written warrant signed by the official issuing the same mentioning the cause of the prosecution, unless they should be taken in the act of commission of crime; 
e. Neither may they for any reason or pretext be debarred from intercourse with others; 
f. They may not be compelled to take an oath, nor be subjected to judicial cross-examination against themselves or their relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity, the second degree of affinity or marriage; 
g. They may not remain imprisoned once the cause for prosecution has ceased; 
h. Neither may they be condemned to suffer any punishment for crime previous to their defence being legally heard; 
i. They may not be sentenced to a term of imprisonment longer than that of 10 years;
j. They may not be deprived of their liberty for political reasons, once order is re-established.
(15.) Equality, in virtue of which-
a. All Venezuelans have the right to be tried according to the same laws, and are subject to the same contributions, service, and duties; b. No titles of nobility, hereditary honours or distinctions shall be granted, neither shall places or appointments be given whose pay or emoluments should last longer than the period of service; 
c. Officials and corporations will not be addressed in formal terms other than "Citizen" and "Sir." 

15. The present enumeration of privileges does not preclude the States from securing to their inhabitants further guarantees. 
16. The laws of the States will settle the penalties for the infringement of these guarantees, and will establish legal procedure to render the same effective. 
17. Those who should issue, sign, or carry out decrees, orders,

or resolutions infringing or violating any one of the guarantees accorded td Venezuelans are guilty, and shall be punished in conformity with the sentence of the law. Every citizen possesses the necessary qualifications for denouncing similar acts.
CHAPTER IV. Of the National Legislature

Section 1. 
18. The National Legislature shall consist of two Chambers, one of Senators rind the other of Deputies. 
19. The States shall settle the mode of conferring the appointments Of Senators and Deputies. 

Section 2. Of the Chamber of Deputies. 
20. In order to form the Chamber of Deputies, each State shall elect, by popular vote, according to the 23rd paragraph of Article 13, one Deputy for every 26,000 inhabitants, and one other for any number of inhabitants above 12,000. The State shall in a similar manner elect the same number of substitutes to the representatives appointed.
21. The Deputies hold their appointments during two years, when the whole Corps of Deputies must be renewed. 22. The duties of the Chambers of Deputies are:- 
(1.) To examine the annual report presented by the President of the United States of Venezuela; (2.) To censure the Ministers of States, who in consequence resign their places. (3.) To investigate any accusation of treason towards the country, infringement of the Constitution, or transgression of the general laws brought against the citizen entrusted with National Executive, to examine any complaints made against the Ministers of State and other national officials for any violation of the Constitution and other laws, and for the improper exercise of their duties according to Article 82 of this Constitution, against the superior officers of the States for breach of the Constitution and general laws of the Republic. This power is preventive, and does not impair that which other authorities may possess for the purposes of judgment and punishment. 
23. When any Deputy, individual, or Corporation brings forward an accusation, the following rules shall be observed:

(1.) Committee of three Deputies shall be appointed by ballot.
(2.) The Committee will give its opinion within three days, deciding whether there exists just cause for intending proceedings. (3.) The Chamber will consider the report, and abide by the decision of the absolute majority of those present, the Deputy bringing the accusation abstaining from voting.

24. The finding a true count, ipso facto, suspends the accused, and invalidates him from the exercise of office during the trial. 
Section 8. Of the Senate. 
25. In order to form this Chamber each State shall elect two principal Senators and two Deputies to fill up fitty vacancies which may occur. 
26. To be qualified for holding the office of Senator, the candidate must be Venezuelan by birth, and 80 years of age. 
27. Senators hold office during two years. 
28. The Senate pursues and pronounces sentence on the judicial proceedings instituted by the Chamber of Deputies,
29. Should the proceedings not have terminated during the Session, the Senate will remain assembled, solely with that object, until the case be concluded. In that case the Senators shall not receive their daily salary. 

Section 4. Dispositions common to both Chambers. 
30. The Legislative Power shall assemble every year in the capital of the United States on the 20th of February, or as nearly as possible at that date. The Chambers will not wait for a special summons, and their sessions will last during 70 days, and may be prolonged until a term of 90 days be reached. 

31. The Chambers shall hold their opening session in the presence of at least two-thirds of their respective members. Should a quorum not be forthcoming, the members shall meet a preparatory Committee, who will dictate measures to secure the assembly of the absent Representatives. 
82. Once the sessions' are opened, they may continue in the presence of two-thirds of the Representatives who formed the first quorum, if this number be not less" than one-half of the total number of numbers. 83. Although the two Chambers hold separate Sessions, they shall assemble in Congress whenever the Constitution and laws may so decide, or when one or the other considers shell meeting advisable. The Chamber agreeing to the motion will fix the day and hour of assembly. 84. The sessions shall be public or secret as the Chamber shall decide. 
35. The Chambers exercise the right-(1.) Of framing the rules which shall be observed during sittings and debates. (2.) Of determining the penalty for infringement of the same. (3.) Of ordering the formation of a corps of police for the protection of the House of Session. 

(4.) Of inflicting penalties on those spectators who may transgress any established rule. (5.) Of removing any impediment to the unrestricted exercise of their duties. (6.) Of ordering the execution of any privative resolution. (7.) Of confirming the election of the members and receiving their resignation, 
36. Ono of the Chambers shall not adjourn the session, nor change the place of meeting, without the assent of the other, and should they be unable to agree they shall meet in Congress, and the vote of the majority shall decide on the steps to be taken. 
37. The exercise of office as Senator or Deputy is incompatible with any other public appointment during the session; the law will determine the compensation to be given in return for services rendered, neither may the sum be increased during the constitutional term in which the same is fixed. 

38. The persons of Senators and Deputies are inviolable from the 20th of January of each year until 30 days have elapsed since the close of the sessions. Inviolability consists in the suspension of any proceedings of whatever nature against them. Should any Senator or Deputy be guilty of crime punishable by imprisonment, proceedings shall continuo up to the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry, remaining in this condition until the period of inviolability has passed. 
39. Congress shall be presided over by the President of the Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be Vice-President. 40. Members of the Chambers are not responsible for the opinions expressed or speeches made in the same. 
41. The National Executive shall not appoint Senators or Deputies to any place or office until a year after their constitutional term has elapsed. Diplomatic posts, appointments as Ministers of State, and Military commands in time of war, are excepted from this law, but the acceptance of these places vacates the same occupied by them in the Chambers. 42. No Senator of Deputy shall enter into contracts with the General Government, nor may they press the claims of others before the same. 

Section 5. Attributions of the Legislative Power. 
43. The following are the attributions of the National Legislative Power:- (1.). To adjust the differences which may arise between the several States.

(2.) To institute and organize the Federal District in an un-habited region not exceeding 10 square miles in extent, on which shall be built the capital city of the Union. The district shall be neutral, and may not hold other elections than those which the law may resolve. The district shall temporarily be that which the Constituent Assembly shall determine, or that which the National Legislature shall direct. (3.) To organize all matters relating to the Customs, which dues shall form the income of the Treasury of the Union until another mode of revenue be substituted. (4.) To decide all matters concerning the security and improvement of the coast and maritime ports. (5.) To institute and organize the National Post Office, and levy taxes on the transport of correspondence. (G.) To frame the National Code of laws in accordance with the 22nd paragraph of Article 13 of the Constitution. (7.) To definitively fix the value, pattern, alloy, weight, and mint of the national coinage, and to pass a resolution on admission and circulation of foreign coins. (8.) To devise the coat of arms and National Standard, which shall be similar in all the States. (9.) To create, suppress, and provide funds for official appointments. (10.) To decide all matters concerning the National Debt. (11.) To contract loans on the National Credit. (12.) To dictate the necessary measures for the publication of a census of the population and National statistics. (13.) To fix annually the number of men composing the military and naval forces, and decree the Military Regulations. (14.) To frame the rules for the formation and substitution of the forces mentioned in the previous paragraph. (15.) To declare war and to request the National Executive to take steps for peace negotiations. (16.) To express approval or disapproval of Treaties or Diplomatic Conventions. Only on this condition may the ratification of the same be exchanged. (17.) To express approval or disapproval of the contracts for national public works entered into by the President of the Union; without this condition they may not be undertaken. (18.) To state annually the budget of the annual public expenditure. (19.) To promote measures conducing to the greater prosperity of the country and progress of the same in connection with general knowledge of arts and sciences. (20.) To settle and unify the national weights and measures.

(21.) To grant amnesties. (22.) To establish under the name of territories a special form of administration, according to which certain regions entirely uninhabited, or peopled only by uncivilized natives, are to be governed. These territories lie within the immediate jurisdiction of the Executive Power of the Union. (23.) To establish the procedure and dictate the penalties to be inflicted by the Senate in the trial of eases brought forward in the Chamber of Deputies. (24.) To increase the number of inhabitants requisite for the appointment of a Representative. (25.) To allow or prohibit the admission of foreigners into the public service. (26.) To issue the decree for the election of the President of the Union. (27.) To enact laws for the regulation of invalid and retiring military pensions. (28.) To decree that all national officials and those in the service of the separate States are responsible for the infringement of the Constitution arid general laws of the Republic. (29.) To determine the mode of granting military commissions and promotions. 

44. Besides the present enumeration, the National Legislature may enact the necessary general laws. 
Section 6. Of the Formation of the Laws. 45. The laws and decrees of the National Legislature may be proposed by members of either Chamber, in the manner prescribed by their respective regulations. 46. When a project shall have been presented, the admission of the same to discussion shall be considered, and that having taken place, three debates, one day intervening between each, shall be held, observing the rules laid down for such debate. 47. The projects having obtained the assent of the Chamber where they were presented, shall pass to the other Chamber to be discussed in a like manner, and if not thrown out shall be returned to the original Chamber, accompanied by the amendments which may be deemed necessary. 

48. Should the Chamber originating the scheme reject the amendments, they may insist and manifest to the other House their reasons in writing. They may assemble in Congress and name a general committee for discussion of a mode of agreement, but should they be unable to come to an understanding, the matter is adjourned to the next session. 49. When the projects of laws are sent from one Chamber to the

other, the number of times discussion of the same has taken place shall be specified. 50. One law reforming another shall be enacted as a whole, and the preceding decree shall be integrally cancelled. 
51. The following formula shall be used in the issue of decrees- "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela-decrees." 
52. Motion thrown out during one legislative period shall not be brought forward again until another session. 53. Projects pending in one Chamber at the end of the session shall undergo the usual three discussions in the course of the subsequent session. 54. Laws are abolished observing the same procedure as that required for their enactment. 55. When the Ministers of State shall have pointed out to the Chamber the unconstitutional character of any motion, and the Chamber shall persist in affording legal sanction to the same, the Executive Power of the Union may submit the matter to the nation represented by the respective Legislature of each State. 56. Should the case provided for by Article 55 occur, each State shall possess one vote, expressed by the majority of the members of the Legislative Power, and the result of the deliberations shall be sent to the High Federal Court, with the words "Confirmed" or "Rejected." 57. Should the majority of the States hold the same view of the matter as the Executive, the High Federal Court shall decree the suspension of the law and report the same to the Congress, whose proceedings are in this case void of effect. 68. Laws shall not come into operation until their official publication in due form has taken place. 59. The power of sanctioning laws may not be transferred to a deputy. 60. No law shall be retroactive except in matters of judicial procedure, and the lowest penalty to be inflicted by the same shall in such cases be applied.
CHAPTB V. Of the National Executive.

Section 1. Of the Mead of the General Government. 
61 All matters relating to the general government of the nation which by this-Constitution are not placed under any other authority are within the competency of a Magistrate named President of the United States of Venezuela. 

62. In order to be qualified for holding the office of President, the candidate must be of Venezuelan birth, and 30 years of age. 
63. The President shall be elected by the citizens of all the
States by direct and public vote, according to the rule laid down in paragraph 28 of Article 18 of this Constitution; by this means each State possesses one vote, which shall be that of the majority of the voters. 64. The Chambers shall meet for the purpose of recording the votes on the eighth day of the sessions of Congress. If by this date all the election registers shall not have been received, measures shall be taken to secure the prompt despatch of the same, adjourning the net to a date 40 days distant should such delay be deemed necessary. After the date of 40 days has been reached, the election may take place by the votes of those registers which have been received, should their number not be less than two-thirds of the total number. 65. In the case provided for by Article 64, the successful candidate for the Presidency shall be the citizen obtaining an absolute majority of votes. Should there be no absolute majority, Congress shall choose the President from those two who should have obtained the greatest number. In this case votes shall be taken one for each State, but there can be no election unless two-thirds of the States are present. The vote of a State is that of the absolute majority of the Senators and Representatives of the same; should there be an equal number of votes, lots shall be drawn to decide the matter. 66. No member of the Chambers may absent himself from sessions without the assent of Congress. 67. During any temporary absence the President's place shall be taken by one of the Ministers of State elected by the majority of their colleagues. In case of death, resignation, dismissal, or termination of the constitutional term of office for which he was elected, the President of the High Federal Court shall be temporarily entrusted with supreme power, and will order steps to be taken for a fresh Presidential election, unless the vacancy should occur within the last six months of the Constitutional period. 68. I n the contingency provided for by Article 67 of this Constitution, the Acting President shall possess the qualifications specified by Article 62, that is, he must be of Venezuelan birth and 30 years of age; should the President of the High Federal Court not fulfil the above-mentioned conditions, he shall be replaced by one of his colleagues chosen during a public session and by the majority of votes. 69. The President shall remain in power during two years from the date of the 20th of February, when he shall resign office and call upon the official designated by law to succeed him, although he may not have exercised his authority during the entire period for which he was appointed. 70. The late President or official appointed to act provisionally in his stead may not be re-elected for the immediate term, neither

may they be succeeded by any relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity or civil affinity. 71. The law will fix the salary of the President or those appointed to act in his stead, neither may the sum be increased or diminished during the Constitutional period in which the decree regulating the same is issued. 

Section 2. Of the Attributes of the President of the United States of Venezuela. 
72. The following are the attributes of the President of the Union:-” (1.) To defend the nation from external attacks. (2.) To carry out and provide for the execution of the laws and decrees of the National legislature. (3.) To provide for and secure the collection of national revenue. (4.) To administer waste lands in accordance with the law. (5.) To summon the National Legislature for their usual periodical assembly, and on other occasions when the importance of any event should render such a meeting necessary. (6.) To appoint Diplomatic Agents, Consuls-General, and Consuls; the candidates for the former posts, however, must be of Venezuelan birth. (7.) To carry on negotiations and conclude Treaties with other nations, subject to the ratification of the National Legislature. (8.) To enter into contracts for the benefit of the nation, and submit the same to the Legislature for their approbation. (9.) To appoint and remove the Ministers of State. (10.) To appoint those financial agents whose nomination does not lie within the authority of other officials. Venezuelan birth is an indispensable qualification for holding these posts. (11.) To remove and suspend from the exercise of their duties all officials whose appointment depends solely on his will, and cause them to be tried, should such a course appear advisable. (12.) To grant letters of naturalization according to the form prescribed by law. (13.) To grant ships' registers to Venezuelan vessels. (14.) To declare war in the name of the Republic when the same shall have been decreed by Congress. (15.)' In the contingency of war with a foreign Power he may- a. Exact the assistance of the States for the organization of the national defence; b. Levy taxes in advance, and raise loans whenever the national revenue proves insufficient to meet the expenditure; c. Arrest and expel individuals belonging to the belligerent


nation who should in any manner be opposed to the defence of the country; rf. Suspend all guarantees which may be incompatible with the defence of the independence of the country, excepting inviolability of life; e. Make known the locality where the National Executive shall temporarily remove if there should exist important reasons authorizing similar action. f. Arraign for high treason any Venezuelan who should prove himself hostile to the national defence; g. Issue letters of marque, and dictate the-procedure to be observed in cases of capture "of prizes. (16.) To make use of the national forces, and of the power granted by Clauses a, b, and c of the preceding paragraph, to re-establish constitutional order in case of sedition for the purpose of subverting any one of the national political institutions. (17.) To dispose of the national forces for the repression of any armed collision between two or more States, to require them to lay down their arms and submit their differences to the decision of the national authorities in accordance with the eighth paragraph bf Article 13 of this Constitution. (18.) To direct military operations or assume the command of the forces in the cases contemplated by the preceding paragraph. The President may also absent himself from the capital when business of public interest should so require. (19.) To grant general or partial amnesties. (20.) To defend the territory named the "Federal District" when there are well-grounded motives for anticipating an invasion of the same on the part of hostile forces. (21.) To fulfil all other obligations imposed on him by the national laws. 73. "When the National Executive shall have made use of all or any one of the rights accorded to him by the provisions of the preceding Article, he shall report the same to the Congress within the first week of the subsequent session. Section 3, Of the Ministers of State.

74. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall appoint the number of Ministers determined by law for transaction of business. The same law shall determine their duties and obligations, and shall provide for the organization of their respective Departments. 75. To hold the appointment of Minister of State it is requisite- (1.) To be 25 years of age.
(2.) To be of Venezuelan birth, or to have been a naturalized Venezuelan citizen during five years. 76. The Minister of State is the usual and indispensable mouthpiece of the President of the "Union; oil the Presidential Decrees shall be countersigned by a Minister or Ministers, and they shall not in any other form be executed or carried out by the authorities, officials, and private individuals. 77. No Ministerial acts shall be drawn up in violation of this Constitution and the General Code of Laws; Ministers are not freed from responsibility through the order of the President, even though the same be given in writing. 78. The decision of all matters not relating to the interior and economic arrangements of the several offices shall be reserved to the Council pf Ministers, and their responsibility is therefore collective. 79. The Ministers shall, in the course of the first five sessions of the Chambers, submit an account of their past acts, and a sketch of the future policy of their respective Departments. They shall also present any verbal or written report the Chamber may require, excepting diplomatic or warlike negotiations, the publication of which is not opportune. 80. They shall during the same period present the budget of public expenditure for the current year, and an account of the sums expended during the past financial year, 81. The Ministers possess the right of speech in the Chambers, and may be called upon to appear in person to give any information desired by the Chamber. 82. Ministers are responsible-” (1.) For treason against the country. (2.) For breach of this Constitution. (8.) For misapplication of the public funds. (4.) For greater expenditure than the sum allowed in the yearly estimates. (5.) For subornation or bribery with regard to the duties of their office, or the appointment of public officials. Section 4. 83. The National Executive Power is exercised by the President or Acting President of the Union, together with the Ministers of State, who are the instruments of action and communication. 84. The functions of the National Executive may not be exercised beyond the limits of the Federal District, except in the case provided for by Clause e, 15th paragraph of Article 72. When the President assumes the command of the army, or should lie absent himself from the Federal District, making use of paragraph 18 of the same Article, he shall be temporarily replaced in the manner determined by Articles 67 and 68 of this Constitution. .

CHAPTER VI.-Of the High, Federal Court. Of the Formation of the Court.

Section 1.

85. The High Federal Court shall consist of five members with the following qualifications:-” (1.) Venezuelan birth, or 10 years' naturalization as Venezuelan citizen. (2.) To be over SO years of age. 86. To provide for the appointment of members of the High Federal Court each State shall present the Congress a list of five candidates, and the Chambers shall elect the citizen obtaining the largest number of votes in each of the following sections:-” (1.) Of Cumaná, Wueva Esparta, Maturin, and Barcelona. (2.) Of Guayana, Apure, Zamora, and Portuguesa. (3.) Of Bolivar, Guzman Blanco, Guárico, and Carabobo. (4.) Of Cojédes, Taracui, Barquisimeto, and Falcon. (5.) Of Zulia, Trujillo, Guzman, and Tachira. 

The choice between two candidates obtaining an equal number of votes shall be with the Congress, and when for any motive the States shall not have presented their respective lists, the Congress shall temporarily elect members of the High Federal Court to act until the proposals of the States should have been sent in. 87. The Jaw shall specify the various duties and obligations of the principal members and other officials of the High Federal Court. 88. The members and their respective substitutes elected in a similar manner shall hold their appointments during two years. Neither the principal members nor their substitutes shall be qualified for accepting, during the above-mentioned period, any post offered them by the Executive Power, even though they should have resigned their places. Section 2. Towers of the Sigh Federal Court. 89. The following lie within the competency of the High Federal Court- (1.) To try the accusations in matters, civil or criminal, brought against Diplomatic Agents in the cases permitted by international law. (2.) To try the cases instituted by the President against Ministers of State, who shall be informed of the same if the Court should pronounce sentence of suspension from office. (3.) To try the cases of Ministerial responsibility when the accusation shall have been made in accordance with the regulations laid down in this Constitution, Should suspension from exercise of office be considered necessary, the Court shall petition the President, who shall grant the request. (4.) To try cases of responsibility of Diplomatic Agents accredited to other nations, instituted against them for improper execution of their duties. (5.) To try the accusations of responsibility brought against the high officials of the various States, following the precedent laid down in paragraph 24 of Article 13 of this Constitution. (G.) To try civil and criminal cases in which the nation is made a party, and when the law shall so decide. (7.) To adjust the differences which may arise between the authorities of several States in matters of jurisdiction or judicial competence. (8.) To take cognizance of all matters which the States shall submit to their consideration. (9.) To define the law in force when national laws are in conflict, or when national laws are in conflict with the laws of particular States, or when the law of particular States is in conflict with itself. (10.) To take cognizance of the questions raised by the contracts signed or negotiations carried out by the President of the Union. (11.) To try cases in which the capture of prizes is concerned. (12.) To fulfil all the other obligations determined by law. 
CHAPTER VII Supplementary Dispositions. 

90. All powers not expressly delegated to the General Government of the nation by this Constitution are within the competency of the several States. 
91. Courts of Justice in the several States are independent; lawsuits instituted before them according to their legal procedure and concerning matters within their exclusive competency shall be brought to a close in the States, and shall not the subject to the examination of any extraneous' Court. 92. All Acts of Congress or of the National Executive violating the rights secured to the States by this Constitution, or impugning their respective independence, shall be declared void of effect by the High Federal Court whenever the majority of the Legislature shall require a like decision. 93. The public national forces are of two kinds, land and naval, and shall consist of the urban militia organized by the several States according to their respective laws. 94. The forces under the command of the Union shall consist of volunteers, together with a contingent supplied by the several States, calling upon those citizens for military service who, according to the laws, are under that obligation.

95. The contingent may in case of war be increased by the addition of the corps of militia until the number of men required by the National Government be obtained 98; The National Government may dismiss the commanders of the contingent supplied by the States in cases determined by and with the forms required by the military regulations; the Government shall in this event demand their substitution by the authorities of the several States
97. Civil and military authority shall not be exercised by the same individual or political body. 
98. The nation possesses the right of ecclesiastical patronage, and shall exercise the same in the manner determined by law. 
99. The General Government of the Union shall not appoint resident officials possessing authority or jurisdiction in the States other than those elected by the same. Are excepted-financial agents, officers commanding the garrisons of national fortresses, arsenals established by law, naval stations and ports; the commanders shall only possess jurisdiction within the limits of their appointment, and the barracks or fortresses which they command; they may not for this reason refuse to submit to the general laws of the State in which they reside. All military stores existing at present In the States are the property of the National Government. 
100. The National Government may not appoint commanders or quarter troops in any State, although they may belong to the same, or in any other previous td obtaining the1 assent of the State in which the forces are to be distributed. 101. Neither the National Executive or the Executive Power of the States shall exercise armed intervention in the internal differences of a State; they can only tender their good offices for the peaceful solution of the difficulty. 102. In the event of a temporary absence, disappearance, death, or dismissal of the President of the Union, the appointment of the official called upon to replace him shall be immediately notified to the States. 
103. The National Congress shall not increase the export duties, neither shall they mortgage them to any greater extent, and as soon as the actual mortgages are liquidated through compensation, substitution by other taxes or capital payment, the exportation of national produce shall be freed for ever from all taxes. 104. All usurped authority is ineffectual; acts of the same are null and void. All resolutions determined by the direct or indirect intervention of the forces, or by the subversive attitude of popular meetings, are ipso facto void and ineffectual. 
105. No official or political body shall exercise any power not distinctly granted to them by the Constitution and the Laws.

106. Any citizen may impeach national officials, or those whose appointments belong to the State, before the Chamber of Deputies, their1 respective superiors, or the authorities named by law. 
107. Officials named by the President upon his own responsibility conclude their term of office simultaneously with him in each Constitutional period, but continue in their posts until replaced. 108. No expenditure shall bet effected by the National Treasury for which an express sum shall not have been assigned by Congress in the annual budget, and those who may infringe this regulation will be civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the suns which may have been disbursed. In every disbursement of the Public Treasury ordinary charges shall have the preference over extraordinary ones. 109. The Departments for the Collection of National Taxes and those of the Pay Office shall always remain separate, the former having no power to carry out payments except in the case bf the salaries of their own respective officials. 110. When for any reason the budget for the corresponding fiscal period shall have failed to be voted, the previous one shall remain in operation. 1ll. During the periods of National or State elections the public force shall be disarmed, and the respective laws shall decide upon the manner for effecting the same. 
112. In International Treaties of Commerce and Friendship a clause shall be inserted, that all differences between the Contracting Parties shall fee obliged to be settled without recourse to war by the arbitration of a friendly Power or Powers. 113. No individual shall be able to fill more than one appointment under nomination of the Congress or of the National Executive. The acceptance of any other is equivalent to the resignation of the first. Officials holding posts which are not removable cease to hold such posts upon becoming Senators or Deputies when the posts in question ate dependent upon the National Executive. 
114. A law will create and point out any obiter National Courts which shall be deemed necessary. 
115. The national officials shall be empowered to accept employments, honours, or recompenses froth foreign nations without the sanction of the National Legislature. 
116. The national forces cannot take deliberative action, they are passive find obedient. No armed body can make requisitions or exact assistance of any description except from the civil authorities, and in the form and manner which the law prescribes. 117. The nation and States shall promote the immigration and colonization of foreigners in compliance with the laws upon those subjects.

118. A- law shall regulate the manner in which the national officials on taking up their posts shall take the oath, or make the affirmation for fulfilling their duties. 119. The National Executive shall negotiate Treaties of Alliance and Confederation with the Governments of America. 120. The law of nations forms part of the national legislation, and the provisions of the same shall especially take effect in cases of civil war, the result of which will be that an end will be able to be put to such a state of things by means of agreements between the belligerents, who are bound to respect the humane usages of Christian and civilized nations. 121. The laws and regulations of the Governments of the States shall remain in force until such time as the now Legislatures shall place them in harmony with the precepts of this Constitution, which must be effected within the term of four months. 122. This Constitution may be reformed entirely or in part by the National Legislature if the majority of the State Legislatures shall desire the same, but the reform shall never take place except as regards those points which may be specially desired by the States. 123. The present Constitution shall take effect from the day of its official publication in each State, and in all public acts and documents shall be cited the date of the Federation, that is to say, the 20th of February, 1859, and that of the Law, namely, the 28th of March, 1864.
CHAPTER VIII.- Temporary Arrangements. 

124. The new constitutional period shall begin to be dated for the posts of the general administration of the Republic on the 20th of February, 1877, which terminates the present period, and for the officials of the States as soon as the actual posts shall cease in conformity with their respective Constitutions. Given and signed in the Palace of the Sessions of the Federal Legislative Body in Caracas, the 23rd of May, 1874,11th year of the Law and 18th of the Federation. J. E. PACHECO, President of the Senate, Senator for the State of Bolivar. DIEGO B. URBANEJA, President of the Chamber of Deputies, Deputy for the Federal District. 

Federal Palace, Caracas, the 27th of May, 1874, 11th year of the Law, and 16th of the Federation. Execute it and provide for its execution. GUZMAN BLANCO. 
