UnDEr the auspices of the Supreme Lawgiver of the Universe, we, the Deputies of the provinces of Venezuela, assembled in National Convention, in order to effect the most perfect union, to establish justice, to insure domestic tranquillity, to provide for the common defence, to promote general prosperity, and to secure the precious gift of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, ordain and establish the present Constitution. TITLE I.—Of the Venezuelan Ration and its Territory. A m . I. The Venezuelan nation is forever and irrevocably free and independent of every foreign Power, and it is not, nor ever shall be the patrimony of any family or person. I I . The sovereignty resides essentially in the nation. I I I . The territory of the Republic comprises all that which, before the political transformation of 1810, was called the Captainship-General of Venezuela, with all its rights and appurtenances; and it is divided into provinces, cantons, and parishes. IV. The unpeopled territories, which are intended for colonies, and those occupied by indigenous tribes, may be separated from the provinces to which they belong, by constitutional congresses, and may be governed by special laws.




V. No part of the territory can pass under the dominion of another Power by alienation; but this provision shall not be an obstacle to such transactions as may be indispensable to fix the boundaries between the Republic and the neighbouring nations, provided that no community lose its nationality thereby. TITLE II.—Of the Venezuelans, VI. The Venezuelans are: 1. By birth, all who are born in the territory of Venezuela; the children of a Venezuelan father or mother born in the territory of Colombia; and those of Venezuelan parents born in any foreign country. • 2. By adoption, those born in any of the other Spanish-American Republics, with no other condition than that of proving their origin, and stating their wish to become Venezuelans, before the authority determined by law. ' 3. By naturalization, foreigners already naturalized, and those who obtain letters of naturalization in conformity with the law. TITLE III.— Of the Government of Venezuela. VII. The Government of Venezuela is and always shall be republican, popular, representative, responsible, and alternative. VIII. The people exercise the sovereignty directly in the elections, and indirectly by the public powers which this Constitution establishes. IX. The public power is divided into national and municipal. X. The national power is divided into legislative, executive, and judicial.
TITLE I V — Of the Citizens.

XI. The following are citizens, and therefore have the right of electing for the exercise of the public powers : • 1. All Venezuelans 20 years of age, 2. Those who are or have been married, although not of that
age

'

XII. The rights of the citizens are suspended : 1. By mental alienation. 2. By condemnation to bodily punishment, in virtue of an executory sentence, whilst the said punishment is in execution. 3. By judicial interdiction. TITLE V.—Of Individual Rights. X1JI. Slavery is abolished forever in Venezuela, and all slaves are declared free who tread upon its territory. XIV. Every Venezuelan has the right of expressing his thoughts


and opinions by means of the press, without need of previous censure, and also by word of mouth, and in any other way, but under the responsibility determined by law, in cases of offence against public morality, or of attack upon private life. Trials in matters of the press shall be by jury. XV. All Venezuelans have the right of meeting and assembling without arms for any purpose, public or private, and of in. making such representations to the authorities as they may think fitting. XVI. AH Venezuelans have the right of exercising any profession or calling whatever, excepting only such as are the property of other persons by privilege granted according to law, such as are injurious to public morality, or the health of towns, and such as obstruct the ways of communication. XVII. All Venezuelans have the right of passing through the territory of the Republic and of departing from it, without need of passport, unless this has been prohibited by the judicial authority in the cases determined by law. XVIII. No one can be withdrawn from his natural judges, or brought before commissions or extraordinary tribunals, nor can any one be tried, except by laws anterior to his offence or act. or have sentence passed upon him until after he has been heard and legally convicted. XTX. No Venezuelan can be taken, arrested, or detained, except; by virtue of an order signed by the competent authority, in which the cause is expressed, and of which a copy shall be given to the person arrested; unless he be caught flagrante delicto, for in that case any one may apprehend him, in order to take him immediately before the magistrate. XX. In criminal matters the order for apprehension or arrest cannot be issued without previous summary inquiry, showing that a deed has been done which is punishable by law with corporal punishment, and that there are good grounds for believing that it was committed by the person against whom the order for apprehension or arrest is issued, and who must be set at liberty on bail, at whatever stage of the proceedings it may appear that the said punishment cannot be inflicted. XXI. Every one arrested in a criminal case, must be charged, within the 3 days following his apprehension, with the offences resulting from the summary inquiry which occasioned it, in order that, being duly informed thereof, he may answer them and defend himself. XXII. The jailer or governor of the prison cannot receive any one under arrest without the order mentioned in Article XIX. nor prohibit him from communication without written directions from the magistrate, who can in no case extend it beyond 3 days.




XXIII. The jailer or governor cannot apply any other kinds of confinement than those which have been expressly directed in writing by the magistrate, who can only order that such be employed as are absolutely necessary to prevent escape, or any disorder in the prison. XXI V. In criminal cases no one shall be obliged to bear witness against himself, nor against his forefathers, descendants, wife, and other relations, to the fourth civil degree of consanguinity and second of affinity. XXV. The domestic hearth and the secrecy of letters and private papers are inviolable; the former cannot be encroached upon, nor the latter opened or read unless by competent authority, and in the cases and with the formalities prescribed by law. XXVI. No one can be deprived of the least portion of his property, nor can it be applied to any public use without his consent, or that of Congress. When the common interest, legally proved, requires this, it must always be on the supposition of a just compensation. XXVII. All Venezuelans are equal before the law. XXVIII. The foregoing enumeration of rights is not to be understood as a negation of any other rights whatever which belong to individuals, and which may not be included under this title. XXIX. Foreigners in Venezuela enjoy the same individual rights and safeguards as the Venezuelans, and are subject, like them, to the laws and authorities of the Republic TITLE VI.—Of the Legislative Power. XXX. The Legislative power is exercised by a Congress consisting of two Chambers, one of Deputies, and the other of Senators. XXXf. The Congress shall assemble every year in the capital of the Republic on the 20th of January, without need of letters of convocation, and its sessions shall last for 90 days. If, by any accident, it should not be able to assemble on the appointed day, it shall do so as soon after as possible. XXXII. Neither of the Chambers can open its sessions without the presence of two-thirds of its members; but at all events, the members present, whatever their number may be, are to assemble and compel the absentees to attend. X X X U I . "When the sessions have been opened with the number prescribed in the preceding Article, they may continue in each Chamber with the presence of one more than half the whole number of members belonging to it. XXXIV. The Chambers shall be installed by themselves, they shall open and close their sessions on the same day, and shall hold




them in the same town. In order to agree upon their removal to a particular place, or to suspend their sessions for more than two days, the Chambers shall assemble together, and what the absolute majority of Congress agrees to shall be decided upon. XXXV. Each Chamber has the right of making the regulations to be observed in its sessions, debates, and deliberations, and can establish therein the penalties which the members are to suffer who infringe them, even to expulsion from its body if so decided by two-thirds of the Chamber. XXXVI. The Chambers administer the police in the building wherein they hold their sessions, and they can dictate such measures as may secure the free exercise of their functions. XXXVII. The exclusive resolutions of each Chamber do not require the sanction of the President of the Republic, nor yet the consent of the other Chamber. XXXVIII. The Chambers assemble together in Congress when determined by the Constitution or the law, or in any other case when they may consider it necessary. On these occasions the President of the Senate shall preside, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be Vice-President. XXXJX. The sessions of the Chambers shall be public, but they may be secret when the Chambers consider it requisite. XL. The Senators and Deputies bear those characters for the nation, and not for the province which appoints them. XLI. Neither the President nor the Vice-President of the Republic, nor the Secretaries of State, nor the administering judges of the Supreme and Superior Courts, nor Governors, nor soldiers on actual service, can be elected as Senators or Deputies. XLII. The exercise of any other public function is incompatible during the sessions with that of Senator or Deputy, X L I I I . The Senators and Deputies enjoy immunity for their persons and property when they are in sessions, and while going, to Congress and returning to their homes. They can, therefore, neither be sued nor be taken in execution in civil cases- nor can they be arrested or detained unless for a crime of which the penalty is capital punishment, information whereof must be given to the respective Chamber with the summary inquiry, into the fact. In other cases, when a Senator or Deputy may have committed an offence liable to another punishment, corporal or degrading, the magistrate shall at once transmit the summary inquiry to the respective Chamber, in order that, according to the merits of the case, it may suspend the accused and place him at the disposal of the competent magistrate. The law will fix the time that has to be allowed for going to Congress and returning homo. XLIV. The are not responsible at any Senators and Deputies 




time, or before any authority, for the speeches and opinions which they may have delivered in the Chambers. XLV. The Senators and Deputies cannot accept any appointment at the free disposal of the Executive Power, excepting those of Secretaries of State, diplomatic posts, and military commands in time of war; but the acceptance of those appointments vacates' their places in the Chambers. XLVI. The acceptance of the posts of Senators and Deputies is free; but after acceptance it belongs to the respective Chamber to permit the resignation of them. XLVIL The Senators and Deputies shall receive the allowance fixed by law for the days while the sessions last, and for travelling' expenses going to Congress and returning home. XLVI1I. Each Chamber is competent to decide on the invalidity; or nullity of the elections of its members, ••••••>:• TITLE VII.— Of the Chamber of the Senate, • <r-.-

J L I X . The Senate shall be composed of two Senators for each province, elected by the Provincial Legislatures, by absolute majority of votes ; and the election of the" substitutes shall be' made in the same manner. L. The Deputies to the Provincial Legislatures cannot be appointed Senators, either principal or substitute, for the province in which they are Deputies. " LI. The appointment of the Senators shall be for 4 years, one half being renewed every two years. LII. For the office of Senator it is required: X. To be a citizen in the exercise of his rights. 2. To be full 30 years of age. 3. To be a native or an inhabitant of the province which elects him. 4. To be owner of real property producing an annual income of 1,200 dollars, or to be in a profession, employment or office producing 1,500 dollars or having a salary of 2,000 dollars. LIII. The special attributions of the Senate are: 1. To complete the election and to accept the resignations of the Members of the Supreme Court. 2. To grant or refuse its consent to promotions to the rank of Colonel or Commander in the Army, and to that of Captain of a ship or frigate in the Navy. 8. To conclude and pass judgment in trial cases begun in the' Chamber of Deputies. LIV. In order to pass judgment in the causes of which it takes cognizance in conformity with this Constitution, the Senate shall incorporate the Supreme Court of Justice into its own body, with




a deliberative vote; and besides the penalty of deposition, it may impose any other which the law prescribes against the delinquent. LV; No accused person1 can be condemned unless by two-thirds of the whole body of those who have to pass definitive judgment, in conformity with the preceding Article/ L T I . The procedure In the trials within the competency of the Senate shall be determined by a law. LVII. When the Seriate takes cognizance in a cause against the President or Vice-President' of the Republic, if it be not concluded daring the sessions, the Senate Shall continue together for this Sole purpose until it shall be finished. TITLE VIII.— Of the Chamber of Deputies.. LVIII. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of those who are elected by the citizens' of the1 Provinces by relative majority of votes, in direct and secret voting, in the proportion of one Deputy for every 25,000 souls, add one more for au overplus of 15,000. A province which does not contain 25,000 souls, shall still appoint a Deputy; The substitutes' shall be appointed in the same manner and in the same proportion. This basis may be extended by law LIX. For the office" of Deputy it is required : 1.- To be a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights. 2. To be full 25 years of age. LX. The" Deputies shall continue in the exercise of their functions for 4 years, half of them being renewed every two years. L X I . The special attributes of the Chamber of Deputies are : 1. To examine the annual accounts Which the Executive has to lay before it. 2. TO hear the accusations against the President and Vice0President of the Republic, against the Designate, the administering judges of the Supreme Court and the Secretaries of State, in the cases determined by this Constitution. L X I I . When an accusation with documents is brought against any of the functionaries mentioned in the preceding Article, the trial by the Chamber shall be limited to a declaration by two-thirds of the members whether there are grounds for the institution of proceedings, L X I I I . If it be declared that there are grounds for the institution of proceedings, the accuSed shall be thereby suspended from his office, and the Chamber shall transfer the case to the Senate; TiTXit IX.— Of the Attributions of the Congress. LXIV. The attributions of the Congress are: 




1. To form the National Codes, which may be done by means of Committees of compilation and revision appointed for the" purpose. . :<••!•'• 2. To establish taxes, dues, and contributions to provide for the national expenses, to watch over their application, and to take > account thereof from the Executive Power. 3. To determine and assimilate the alloy, value, form, and denomination of the coin. -:••:' '.' 4. To fix and assimilate the weights and measures. 5. To organize the service of the national posts and mails. ?* 6. To decree the formation of the census of the Republic, and to approve or reject it. :•••> 7. To create and suppress the tribunals and courts, and the other national offices, including diplomatic appointments, and to assign their salaries. • '• > ''•'•.• ."> 8. To decree the naval and military force every year. . •• r, » 9. To decree the recruiting of the standing army, and the.; organization of the national militia. , . . , . . : . •. 10. To decree war on consideration of the grounds submitted: by the Executive Power, and to require that power to negotiate for peace. 11. To give or withhold its approval of the Treaties and Conventions concluded by the Executive Power with foreign nations. 12. To decree annually the public expenses on the ,estimates which are to be submitted by the Executive Power through the respective departments, and a sum for unforeseen expenses besides. 13. To decree what is fitting for the administration, preservation, and alienation of the national property. 14. To contract debts on the credit of the State. 16. To allow the establishment of advance banks (cajas hipotecarias) and private banks, upon such conditions as it may think fit to determine. ••> 16. To promote, by laws or contracts, the navigation and canalization of the rivers, the opening of roads and other works, provided they be of national utility. 17. To promote the education of the people, the progress of the sciences and arts, and the institutions for practical industrial instruction. 18. To grant for a limited time exclusive privileges for the stimulation and encouragement of science and industry. 19. To grant personal rewards and recompenses to those who have done great service to the Republic, 20. To establish the rules of naturalization. 21. To decree public honours to the memory of great men. 22. To grant amnesties and pardons.




23; To choose the place for the seat of the Government. 24. To create new provinces on first receiving the petition from the municipal corporations and the report of the Provincial Legislatures, provided that every one of the provinces which are to be created has a population of at least 50,000 souls and sufficient land for its extension; and that the province or provinces from which the cantons are separated still have a population of not less than 100,000 inhabitants. 25. To unite two or more provinces into one, on first receiving the petition of the majority of the cantons thereof, and the report of the respective Legislatures; and to alter the boundaries of " provinces at the request of the inhabitants of the respective lands, and with the report likewise of the Legislatures. 26. To grant or refuse the passage of foreign troops through the territory of the State. 27. To admit foreigners into the military service of the Republic, or to refuse them admission. 28. To perform the scrutiny and complete the election of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, and to accept or decline their resignations. 29. To give or refuse its consent to promotion to the rank of General. 80. To promote the immigration and colonization of foreigners. 81. To elect the Designate who has to replace the Vice-President of the Republic. 32. To legislate upon ail matters within the competency of the national power, to reform and repeal the established laws. LXV. Neither the Congress nor either of the Chambers can : 1. Bring to trial or impose a penalty on any Venezuelan, whether public functionary or not, except in the cases mentioned in this Constitution; not even as a condition of the pardons which it may grant. 2. Apply any amount of the national treasure for the municipal expenses of the provinces, nor dispose of the municipal revenues for the expenses of the nation 8. Delegate any of its attributions to another authority or body. TITMS X.—Of Framing the Laws.

LXVI. The projects for the laws or decrees of the Congress may originate in either of the two Chambers, on the proposal of the members, or of the Executive Power through the medium of the Secretaries of State, excepting those which impose taxes, which must necessarily originate in the Chamber of Deputies. The estimates must also have their origin in the Chamber of Deputies, LXVII. Every project before it becomes law must be discussed




three times in each Chamber, with an interval of A day at least, and must be approved by the absolute majority of the members present at the respective sessions. LXVI1I. If one Chamber reject a project approved, by the other, the project remains without effect but if it be only altered in the second Chamber, the first may agree to the alterations or insist upon the original project; if it should insist and the other Chamber should likewise persist in the alterations, the project also remains without effect. LXIX. No project shall have the force of Jaw, although it may have been approved by both Chambers, until it has been ordered for execution by the Executive Power, to whom it is to be transmitted by the Chamber in which it originated. If the Executive Power should consider the execution of the project inconvenient, he may object to it, and return it, with his observations, to the. same Chamber, within 10 days from the time of his receiving: it., The Chamber shall then consider the project again with the objections, and may insist on its approval by the votes of the absolute majority of the members present; in this case, it shall transmit the project with the objections to the other Chamber, which shall reconsider it in the same manner, and if both insist, the project shall have the force of law, and the Executive Power shall order its execution without further observations. LXX. In case that the two Chambers should not be agreed, or that either of them should not insist upon any project objected to by the Executive Power, that project cannot be brought forward again during the same sessions. LXXI. if, within the ten days allowed to the Executive Power to object to a project or to order its execution, be should do neither the one nor the other, it shall have the force of law, and shall be promulgated as such; and even if, during the course of that term, the Congress should suspend its sessions or should go into recess, the Executive Power must either order the execution of the project or object to it within the said term ; in the first case he shall cause the law to be promulgated immediately; and in the second he shall publish his objections, also immediately, with which he shall return the project to the Chamber of its origin within the first three days of the next meeting of Congress. L X I I . The Executive Power has the right of objecting to the resolutions of the Congress in united Chambers, when their object is not its own removal, any appointment or resignation. In case of objection, which shall take place within 5 days from the date of his receiving the resolutions, the proceeding shall be of no effect, unless it be again approved by the absolute majority of Congress. L X X I I I . Every project of which the discussion may remain




pending at the end of the sessions of one year, shall be considered in the following sessions as newly introduced in the Chamber where it appears, and shall therefore undergo therein the debates prescribed by this Constitution. LXXIV. On transmitting the projects from one Chamber to the other and to the Executive Power, the dates at which they were discussed shall be mentioned. . LXXV. Any law which reforms another must be completely drawn out, including therein all the provisions which remain in force, and declaring the reformed law abolished. LXX VI. For the laws passed in separate Chambers the Congress shall make use of this formula: " The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies of the Republic of Venezuela, decree;" and for the acts issued in United Chambers, it shall use this: " The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies of the Republic of Venezuela, assembled in Congress, decree." LXXVII. No law shall be binding until it shall have been promulgated. LXXVIII. The laws are repealed with the same formalities as those with which they are passed. TITLE XI.— Of the Executive Power. LXXIX. The Executive Power shall be in charge of a magistrate who shall be called President of the Republic. LXXX. The absence of the President shall be supplied by a Vice-President, and the absence of the latter by a person to be annually designated by the Congress in United Chambers, elected in the form established by this Constitution for the completion of the election of the President of the Republic. LXXXI. The President and the Vice-President shall be elected by the direct and secret voting of the Venezuelans who are in the enjoyment of the citizenship. LXXXII. To be President of the Republic it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, and a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights. L X X X I I I . For the Constitutional election of the President of the Republic it is necessary that the absolute majority of the votes of all who have voted should be in favour of one person. If no one should have obtained that majority, the Congress shall confine the election to the 8 who have obtained the greatest number of votes, beginning by deciding on those 8 persons by secret voting, if there be several who have obtained an equal number of votes from the popular suffrage. LXXXIV. "When the 8 persons to whom the voting is to be confined have been nominated, the Congress shall proceed to the




election of one of them by ballot, and shall declare him constitutionally elected who shall have obtained two-thirds of the Votes of the members present. If no one should have obtained that majority, the proceeding shall be repeated, restricting it to the two who have obtained most votes; and if, after two more ballotings, no one should have obtained two-thirds of the votes, the absolute majority shall be sufficient for the election. In case of equality the voting shall be continued until a majority is obtained. ' LXXXV. The election of President of the Republic shall take place in permanent session, from which none of the members who have given their votes in the first ballot, shall be at liberty to, retire without the permission of Congress; nor shall any one be admitted who has not taken part in that ballot. LXXXVI. The President shall continue in office for 4 years; and he cannot be re-elected until after one constitutional period at least. LXXXVJI. The qualifications for Vice-President, the form of his election, and his duration in office are the same as have been established for the President. L X X X V I I I . No person can be elected as President or Vice-President who is related to those who are President or Vice-President at the time of the election, within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or the second of affinity. L X X X I X . The election of President and Vice-President shall take place two years apart from each other, for which purpose the first Vice-President shall only remain in office for two  years. XC. The President of the Republic ceases from the exercise of his functions on the 20th of January of the year in which the constitutional period ends; and on the same day the Vice-President shall take charge of the Executive Power until Congress has given the appointed President possession. XCI. The President cannot exercise the Executive Power out of the capital of the Republic, except in the case of occupation by hostile forces, or other serious event which renders stay therein impossible. X C I I . On the death, resignation, deprivation, or incapacity of the President, the Vice-President shall exercise the Executive Power Until the end of the constitutional period. X C I I I . If the Vice-President, while charged with the Executive Power for any of the causes mentioned in the preceding Article, should also fail for any of the same causes, the Designate nominated by the Congress shall take his place until the President and Vice-President shall have been elected; the elections of whom shall be' ordered to take place immediately, if there be at least a year wanting to complete the Constitutional period. The President and Vice-




President elected in such a case shall only remain in office for the time wanting to complete the respective period. XCIV. The President is the Chief of the general administration of the Republic, and as such has the following attributions: 1. To preserve internal order and tranquillity, and to secure the State against every external attack. 2. To order the execution of the laws, decrees and acts of the Congress, and to take care that they be promulgated and executed. 8. To convoke the Congress at the ordinary periods; and also extraordinarily if he should consider it necessary on account of any serious occurrence. 4. To exercise the supreme command of the naval and military forces of the Republic. 6. To call out the Militia for service when the Congress has decreed it. 6. To declare war in the name of the Republic, the Congress having previously passed the decree. 7. To conduct the diplomatic negotiations, and to conclude Treaties and Conventions with foreign nations. 8. Freely to appoint and remove the Secretaries of State. 9. To appoint the diplomatic Ministers and agents, when the places have been created by law ; also the Consuls, Vice-Consuls, and commercial agents. 16. To promote to the rank of General with the consent of the Congress in united Chambers, to that of Colonel and Commander in the army, and of Captain of a ship and of a frigate, with the previous approval and consent of the Senate; and to inferior offices in conformity with the laws on the subject. 11. To grant discharges and leave of absence to soldiers and other persons in the service, in accordance with the provisions of the law. 12. To issue patents for navigation ; and also letters of marque and reprisal when Congress has decreed them. • 13. To grant letters of naturalization in conformity with the law. 14. To appoint to all civil, military, and exchequer offices, the appointment to which is not reserved to some other authority. 15. To suspend from their offices those public servants who are freely appointed by the Executive Power, when they infringe the laws, his decrees or orders, on condition of placing them at the disposal of the competent authority, within 3 days, with the report or documents that have caused the suspension, in order that they may be tried. 16. To remove the said civil servants from their offices, when the




public service requires it, excepting in the cases wherein the Constitution or the laws direct otherwise. 17. To see that the collection and application of the national taxes and revenues take place in accordance with the law. > . 18. To commute the punishment of death for some other severe punishment, when there are weighty reasons for so doing; hearing first the report of the tribunal which has passed the final sentence. But this attribution cannot be made use of in favour of those, sentenced by the Senate. • :. XCY. In cases of armed internal commotion threatening the security of the Republic, or of sudden external invasion, the President may request the Congress to authorize him to exercise the following powers: 1. To call out for service such part of the national militia as the Congress shall think necessary. '•• • 2. To demand the taxes in anticipation, or to negotiate loans for, the requisite sums, if the expenses cannot be met with the ordinary revenues. 3. To establish what may be required for passing through, or going out of, the Republic with a passport, 4. To grant general and individual pardons to those compromised in political offices. XCVI. If the Congress should not be assembled, the President of the Republic, in the cases referred to in the preceding Article, shall convoke an extraordinary council composed of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Vice-President of the Republic, and the Secretary who makes the request, presided over by the President of the Supreme Court; this body may grant him, by two-thirds of its votes-, the powers which are mentioned in the said Article. This resolution shall be published and circulated among all the authorities. XCVII. The powers mentioned in Article XCV cannot be granted for more than 90 days. XCVIII. The Executive Power shall render an account to the Congress, within the first 8 days of its next meeting, of all that he has done in the exercise of the powers referred to in the 8 preceding Articles. XCIX. The President of the Republic cannot leave its territory during the period of his administration, nor for a year afterwards, nor can he command the naval and military force in person. TITLE XII.— Of the Secretaries of State. C. For the transaction of the business belonging to the Executive Power, there shall be as many Secretaries as the law may determine. CI. The same qualifications are required for a Secretary as for a Deputy.




OIL all the acts of the President of the Republic, excepting the appointment and removal of the Secretaries, must be authorized by the Secretaries of the respective departments, without which requisite they shall not be obeyed. CIII. The Secretaries shall give an account of the state of their respective departments annually to the Chambers, within the 15 days following their installation. CJV. The verbal or written order of the President does not clear the Secretaries from responsibility. CT, The Secretaries, of State shall be present at the sessions when, called for by either of the Chambers, or when they themselves think it fitting; in any case they have a voice but no vote. TITLE XIII.— Of the Judicial Power. OVI. The judicial power is exercised by a Supreme Court, by superior courts, and by the inferior tribunals and courts established by law. CVII. In criminal causes justice shall be administered by juries, when and in conformity with what future constitutional Congresses may direct. TiTle XIV.—Of the Supreme Court. CVIII. The Supreme Court shall be composed of at least 5 administering judges. CIX. To be an administering judge of the Supreme Court, it is required: 1. To be a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights. 2. To be full 40 years of age. 8. To have been a magistrate of a superior court for 6 years, or to have practiced as an advocate in the Republic for 12 years. CX. The administering judges of the Supreme Court shall be elected by the provincial Legislatures. Two persons must be chosen for each place, one of them, at least, not an inhabitant of the province which makes the election, The voting shall be by ballot. CXI. To provide against the temporary or permanent deficiency of the administering judges of the Supreme court the Congress shall nominate annually in united Chambers, the number of advocates determined by law; who shall be called upon by that court to supply such deficiencies when they occur; nevertheless, in cases of permanent deficiency, notice shall be given to the provincial Legislatures to fill up the vacancy; the appointment is then to be made in the form established by this Constitution. CXII. Each provincial Legislature shall transmit to the Senate a certified copy of the election mentioned in Article CX; the Senate




shall declare those elected who have obtained the majority of votes; and if there should be any one or more who have not obtained that majority, the Senate shall proceed to elect the administering judge or judges who may be without it, in the form and manner prescribed for the election of President of the Republic. CXIII. The attributions of the Supreme Court are .• 1. To unite with the Chamber of the Senate in order to pass judgment in cases brought against the President of the Republic, or against the Vice-President and Designate when they have charge of the Executive Power; against the Secretaries of State, or the administering judges of the court itself in the cases of Article CXLVII. 2. To decree the suspension, and to take cognizance in actions which are brought against the Vice-President of the Republic for ordinary offences when he is not in charge of the Executive Power; against the Secretaries of State and the administering judges of the court itself. 8. To take cognizance in litigated matters amongst the Ministers, Plenipotentiaries, and other Diplomatic Agents, accredited to the Government of the Republic, in the cases allowed by international law, or provided for by treaties. 4. To take cognizance in actions for responsibility against the Diplomatic and Consular Agents of the Republic, for misconduct in the discharge of their functions. 5. To take cognizance in controversies arising out of contracts or negotiations made or carried on by the Executive Power himself, or through agents. 6. To decree the suspension, and take cognizance in actions which are brought against the Governors for responsibility, at the instance of the Executive Power or of any citizen, on consideration of the grounds which there may be for requiring the suspension. 7. To resolve the doubts of the other tribunals in regard to the interpretation of any law, reporting thereon to the Congress for the establishment thereof, if it be considered necessary. 8. To declare, on the petition of any citizen, the nullity of the legislative acts sanctioned by the provincial Legislatures, when they are contrary to the Constitution. D. To complete in the manner established in Article CXII, the election of the administering judges of the superior courts, made by the provincial Legislatures, when any one or more of them may not have obtained the absolute majority; and to provide temporarily for the vacancies. 10. To report to the Congress whatever may be acting for the improvement of the administration of justice. 11. To decide the questions which arise among the provinces, or between one or more provinces and the national Government of the




Republic, respecting competency of powers, respecting rights of property, or respecting any other cause of dispute. 12. To perform such other duties as may be determined by law. CXIV. The administering judges of the Supreme Court cannot, while they are in office, accept any employment on the appointment of the Executive Power. TITLBXV.—Of the Superior Courts and the other Tribunals of Justice.

CXV. The superior courts shall be composed of 8 administering judges at least. CXVI. To be an administering judge of the superior courts it is necessary: 1. To be a Venezuelan in the enjoyment of citizenship. 2. To be 80 years of age. , 8. To b3 an advocate, not suspended. 4. To have been a judge, assessor, or auditor for 4 years at least; or to have exercised the profession of advocate for 6 years. CXVII. The superior courts and the other tribunals and courts - of justice will be organized by law, and their powers, as well as the manner of exercising them, will be determined in the same way. TITLE XVI.— General provisions regarding the Judicial Order. CXVIII. The magistrates and judges cannot be suspended from their offices, except by decree declaring that there is ground for instituting proceedings; nor can they be dispossessed except upon executory sentence. OXIX. The administering judges of the Supreme and superior courts, shall remain in office for 4 yours, one-half being renewed every two years j and they may be re-elected. CXX. The office of administering judge of the Supreme and superior courts is incompatible with the exercise of any profession or public employment. CXXI. All the tribunals and courts are obliged to give the reasons for their sentences. TITLE XVII.— Of the Municipal Power. CXXII. The municipal power shall be exercised by a Legislature, and a Governor in the provinces; by a council and a municipal chief in the cantons; and by such other functionaries and bodies as may be established by the provincial Legislature. TITLE XVIII.— Of the Provincial Legislatures. CXXIII. In every province there shall be a Legislature composed of the Deputies appointed by the cantons, at the rate of 8 Deputies for each canton. The province, which may contain less than 4




cantons, shall still Appoint 12 deputies, distributing that number equally among the cantons. CXXlV. The deputies for each canton shall be appointed by the direct and secret vote of the citizens of the canton every two years; and persons may be elected who are not inhabitants of the canton. CXXV. The substitutes for the provincial Legislature shall be elected in the same manner and in the same proportion as the principal Deputies. CXXVT. The principal Deputies and the substitutes for the provincial Legislature must be citizens in the exercise of their rights. CXXVII. The Legislatures cannot install themselves, nor continue their sessions with leas' than two-thirds of the whole number of their members. They shall assemble every year on the 1st of October in the capital of the province, aid every ordinary Session shall continue 40 days. CXXVIII. The attributions of1 the provincial Legislatures are i 1. To elect the administering judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, in the manner determined by this Constitution. 2. To appoint the administering judges of the superior court of their respective districts, in the same manner as is established in this Constitution, for the election of the administering judges of the Supreme Court. 8. To elect the principal Senators and the substitutes for the province. 4. To organize the Government and administration of the cantons and parishes. 5. To make the necessary arrangements for the appointment of the officers of the national militia, and for the instruction of the militia, subject to the laws of Congress and the regulations of the Executive Power. I). To encourage and promote the immigration of foreigners. 7. To create and suppress cantons and parishes, fix their boundaries, and adjust all controversies that may arise amongst them respecting their limits and powers. 8. To lay on taxes in the province. 9. To pass laws in all branches of the civic, rural, and correctional police. 10. To promote education, the progress of sciences and arts, and institutions for practical industrial instruction; the opening and improvement of ways of communication by road and river, the establishment of hospitals and charitable houses, and all that relates to internal improvements. 11. To legislate upon all matters which are not reserved for the national power.




CXXIX. The provincial Legislatures cannot: 1. Impose taxes upon the external trade of importation or exportation, 2. Pass any resolution contrary to the privileges granted by the Congress or the Executive Power, in conformity With the law. . 3. Impose obligations on the corporations or functionaries exclusively national. 4. Burden the national property and effects with impositions. 5. Subject the inhabitant? of another province, or their property to other burdens than those which weigh on the inhabitants and property of their own province. CXXX. The decrees and resolutions of the provincial Legislatures shall be transmitted to the Governor for execution, and he shall have the power of objecting to them within the 5 days following that on which he has received them. The objections made by the Governor shall be considered by the Legislature, and if it insists upon its resolution by the votes of the absolute majority, the resolution shall be carried into effect. CXXXI. The provisions of Article L X X l shall apply in their respective cases to the Governor and the provincial Legislature, without any other difference than that of the fixed term. CXXXII. The provincial Deputies are not responsible for the speeches and opinions which they deliver in the Chamber; and they shall enjoy immunity to the same extent as the members of the Congress. title XIX.— Of the Governors. CXXXIII. The provincial Executive Power shall be exercised by a magistrate with the title of Governor. CXXXIV. The superior political and administrative Government, and the order and security of the province shall be in charge of the Governor, to whom all the officials, of whatever rank, belonging to the province shall be subordinate. CXXXV. The Governors are agents of the national Power, and as such they shall fulfil the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, and cause them to be fulfilled, and they shall execute the orders which they receive from the Executive Power in matters within his competence, provided they be not opposed to the Constitution and laws. CXXXVI. The Governor must be a citizen in the enjoyment of his rights, and his tenure of office shall be for 4 years. CXXXVI1. The Governors shall be elected by the absolute majority of the citizens who have the suffrage in the province, by direct and secret voting. In case no candidate should have obtained that majority, the provincial Legislature shall complete the election




in the same manner as the Congress does in the election of President of the Republic. CXXXVIII. The Governors cannot be re-elected for the next following period. CXXXIX. It belongs to the Governors : 1. To convoke the provincial Legislatures on extraordinary occasions, when any serious occurrence requires it. . 2. To order the execution of the decrees and resolutions of the Legislatures, and to object to them if they consider them unconstitutional or unfitting. 3. To exercise such other powers as the national or provincial laws may invest them with. OXL. The temporary or permanent absence of the Governors shall be supplied by the persons designated by the provincial laws. CXLI. The Governors shall be paid from the provincial revenues. TITLE XX.— Of the Military Force. CXLII. The military force shall be divided into the standing army, the naval force, and the national militia. CXLIII. The armed force is essentially obedient, and cannot deliberate. CXL1V. The persons belonging to the armed force by sea and land, are subject to the military laws while in actual service. CXLV. The military authority shall never be united to the civil. CXLVI. The national militia shall be organized by law, and shall be under the orders of the Governors of the provinces, who shall call it out for service when the Executive Power orders it by virtue of a resolution of Congress, or of the extraordinary powers granted according to Article XCV, or to act within the province in case of sudden commotion, and in the manner determined by law. TITLE XXI.— Of Responsibility. CXLVII. The following are responsible :• 1. The President of the Republic, and the Vice-President and Designate when they exercise the Executive power:—For treason ; for infraction of this Constitution; for crimes which the laws visit with capital punishment. 2. The Secretaries of State :—For treason; for subornation or bribery; for infraction of this Constitution or of the laws; for malversation of the public funds. 3. The administrating judges of the Supreme Court:—For treason; for bribery; for infraction of this Constitution or of the laws.




OXLVIII. For the intents of the previous Article the crime of treason consists in attempts against the form of Government established in this Constitution, or in taking arms in favour of external enemies, or in leaguing with them or with national subjects in favour of foreigners. CXLIX. .All other persons in the service of the Republic are likewise responsible for their conduct in the exercise of their functions, in conformity with the provisions of the law. TITLE XXI J.— Various Provisions. CL. The Venezuelans have the right of terminating their disputes by arbitration, even after legal proceedings have begun. CLI. All confiscation is abolished, as well as every cruel punishment, and that of death for political offences. The criminal code will restrict the imposition of capital punishment as far as possible. CLII. No sum whatever shall be drawn from the public treasury for other purposes than those determined by the law and in conformity with the estimates, which must be published. CLIII. The municipal revenues cannot be burdened with national imposts. CL1V. The establishment of entailed estates is prohibited as well as of every kind of entail. CLV. Every public body or official is prohibited from exercising any function or authority, which has not been conferred upon them by the Constitution or the law. CLVI. No public functionary shall issue, obey, or execute orders that are manifestly contrary to the Constitution or the laws, or which in any manner violate the essential formalities prescribed by them, or which are issued by authorities manifestly incompetent. CLVII. Those who issue, sign, execute, or order the execution of decrees, orders, or resolutions contrary" to the Constitution and laws which guarantee individual rights, as well as those who carry them out, are culpable, and are to be punished according to those laws. CLVIII. The salaries and appointments of the President and Vice-President of the Republic, of the Senators and Deputies, and of the magistrates of the Supreme Court, can neither be augmented nor diminished during the period for which those who fill the said offices have been elected. CLIX. The provincial elections shall precede the national elections. TITLE XXIII.— Of the Oath, of the Officials. CLX. No public officer shall enter upon the exercise of his functions without first taking the oath to support and defend the 



Constitution, and to fulfil the duties of his office faithfully and exactly. CLXI. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall take this oath in presence of the Congress and at the hands of its President; the Presidents of the National and provincial Chambers, and those of the Supreme and superior courts of justice, in presence of the respective bodies; and the members of these bodies, at the hands of their respective Presidents. CLXII. The Secretaries of State shall take the oath before the President of the Republic; the Governors before the Municipal Council of the capital of the province; and the other civil and military officials before the respective Governors, or before the authority appointed by them. TITLE XXIV.— Of Reforming the Constitution. C L X I U . The reformation of any one or more Articles of this Constitution may be proposed in either of the Chambers, by any number of its members; but before the proposed reforms can be discussed the necessity thereof must be declared in each Chamber by two-thirds of the members present. When the necessity of the reform has been declared, the Chamber which has proposed it shall draw up the project accordingly', in order that it may be discussed with the same formalities as the laws, in the next session, meanwhile the reform shall be published through the press. C L X I I I I . The power granted to Congress by the preceding Article does not extend to any alteration of the form of Government, which shall always be republican, popular, representative, responsible, and alternative. TITLE XXV.—Transitory Provisions. CLXV. The present Constitution shall be promulgated with the solemnity and formalities established by the decree of 26th September, 1830, and shall be immediately put in execution, all laws and decrees, in so far as they are not opposed to it, still remaining in force ; and, in order to effect the renewal prescribed in Articles L I , LX, and CXIX, the National Chambers at their first meeting, and the Supreme and superior courts on their installation, shall decide by lot on the half of their respective members, or the greater number if it should be uneven, who have to retire at the end of the second year. Given at Valencia, in the Sessions-hall of the National Convention, and signed by the Deputies present, on the 24th day of December, 1858. JOSE MONAGAS.


