THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OF VENEZUELA After having made the count of the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Anzoátegui, Apure, Aragua, Bolívar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Falcón, Guárico, Lara, Mérida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Táchira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora and Zulia, that form the Venezuelan Union, and by which it is found that, uniquely, these ratify the Draft of the National Constitution submitted to their approval in conformity with Article 133 of the National Constitution in force, agree: 1. To declare sanctioned the Constitution of the United States of Venezuela and to present to the Provisional President of the Republic two authentic examples of it so that he mandates [it] executed. 2. This Agreement will be published jointly with the Constitution. Given in the Federal Legislative Palace, in Caracas, on 19 June 1928.—Year 133 of Independence and 64 of the Federation. The President, Carlos F. Grisanti. The Vice President, Rubén González. The Secretaries, Jesús Urdaneta Maya y Mario Briceño-Iragorry. THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OF VENEZUELA, IN THE NAME OF GOD ALMIGHTY, and in exercise of the faculty granted to it in Article 126 of the Federal Pact in effect, decrees this: CONSTITUTION First Title The Venezuelan Nation and Its Organization First Section Territory and Political Division Article 1 The Venezuelan Nation is the gathering of all Venezuelans in a pact of political organization with the name of United States of Venezuela. It is forever and irrevocably free and independent from all domination or protection of a foreign Power. Article 2 The territory of the United States of Venezuela is the one that before the political transformation of 1810 corresponded to the Captaincy General of Venezuela, with the modifications resulting from the treaties celebrated by the Republic. This territory can never be ceded, transferred, leased or in any way sold   to a foreign Power, not even for a limited time. Article 3 The national territory is divided, for the purposes of the internal political organization of the Republic, into that of the States, of the Federal District, of the Federal Territories and of the Federal Dependencies. -3- The States are: Article 4 Anzoátegui, Apure, Aragua, Bolívar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Falcón, Guárico, Lara, Mérida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Táchira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora and Zulia. Article 5 The general limits of each one of the States are the ones that they currently have; and are determined by those that the old Provinces of the Law of 28 of April of 1856 specify with the variations coming from the creation of the Federal District and of the Federal Territories and Dependencies, plus those introduced by the National Constitution of 5 of August of 1909 and those convened in 1917 between the States [of] Aragua and Carabobo. The bordering   States can, through conventions approved by their respective Legislatures, modify their common frontier, reciprocally making the territorial compensations or cessions that they may wish. Article 6 The Federal District will be organized by [a] special Law and will be composed of the Departments [of] Libertador and Vargas. The first is formed by the city of Caracas jointly with its foreign parishes: El Recreo, El Valle, La Vega, Antímano, Macarao and Macuto. The Law will determine the attributions of the municipality of the Federal District in a mode to not impede   in it the political action of the Federal Power. Article 7 The city of Caracas is the capital of the United States of Venezuela and [it is] the seat of the Federal Government, without prejudice to what is set forth in paragraph b), attribution 24 of Article 100, and in attribution 25 of the same   Article. Article 8 The Federal Territories are Amazonas and Delta Amacuro. They will be organized by special Laws with the limits that they respectively have in actuality. The limits of such Territories and those of the Federal District with the neighboring States can be modified through Conventions that with the Governments of them [are] celebrated [by] the Federal Executive Power and are approved by the National Congress and the Legislatures of the respective States. Article 9 The Federal Territories [of] Amazonas and Delta Amacuro and the others that are created in accordance to the following Article can opt for the category of States, as long as they meet the following conditions: 1. To have at least the base population required for the election of one Deputy in accordance to this Constitution; 2. To prove before the Congress that they are in the capacity to attend to public service in all its branches and to cover the expenses that this requires. Article 10 The Venezuelan islands of Mar de las Antillas, except those of Margarita and Coche, which constitute the State of Nueva Esparta[,] are Federal Dependencies. The Government and the administration of such Dependencies correspond directly -4- to the Federal Executive while the Law does not raise them to the category of Federal Territories. Article 11 The controversies existing between the States by reason of their limits, and those that could arise for the same cause, between them or with the Federal District or the Federal Territories, will be decided by the Federal and Cassation Court   through the procedure established by [the] Law. Second Section Bases of the Union Article 12 The States enumerated in Article 4 form the Venezuelan Union. They will reciprocally recognize their autonomies; they declare themselves equal in political entity; they retain in all its plenitude the sovereignty not delegated in this Constitution and [they] declare that their first duty and [the duty] of the Federation is the conservation of the independence and integrity of the Nation. In consequence, the States may never break   the national unity, nor will they ally with foreign Powers, nor [will they] solicit their protection, nor may they cede to them any portion of their territory, but they will defend themselves and will defend the federation from any violence intended to damage the national sovereignty. Likewise they are obligated to maintain the regime and the Government of the Union and that of the same States concerning the fundamental bases which are expressed in the following Articles. Article 13 The Government of the United States of Venezuela and [the government] of each one of the States of the Union is and will always be republican, federal, democratic, elective, representative, responsible and alternative. Article 14 The States will be divided into Districts which will enjoy municipal autonomy and will be independent of the Political Power of the State in what concerns their administrative regime, with the restrictions which are established in this Constitution; but in case of an external or internal war the Executive Power of the State can assume also the administration of the District in accordance to what is established in the local Constitution. Article 15 The States agree   to reserve to the federal competence: 1. All that relative to the international action   of the United States of Venezuela as a sovereign Nation. Neither the States nor the Municipalities will be able to establish or cultivate political or diplomatic relations with other nations; 2. All that relative to the Flag, the Coat-of-Arms, the Anthem and the national celebrations  ; and the honorific decorations and medals granted by the Republic; 3. The supreme supervision  of the general interests of the Venezuelan Nation and of the conservation of the public peace in all of the national territory; 4. The Legislation that will govern in the entire Republic in civil, mercantile, penal and procedural matters; with regards to banks, credit institutions, social prevision, health  , conservation and development   of the mountains, the -5- waters and the other natural wealth of the country; labor, manufacturing marks, literary, artistic and industrial property, public registry, expropriation for public utility, immigration, naturalization, expulsion and admission of foreigners, and the regulatory legislation of the guarantees granted by this Constitution; 5. The legislation relative to the weights and measurements that will be used in the entire Republic; 6. The supreme supervision  of the right   application of the national laws in the entire national territory; 7. The administration of justice by [the] organ of the Federal and Cassation Court in the matters of its competence, following this Constitution; of the ordinary Tribunals in the Federal District and in the Federal Territories and Dependencies and of the Federal Tribunals, which may act even in the States, in the trials in which the Venezuelan Nation is a party, in the military processes, in those concerning vacant lands, mines and saline [soils], in the fiscal processes relative to federal taxes and in the other cases determined by [the] Law. The same can attribute to the Tribunals of the States the functions of Federal Tribunals; 8. All that relative to the Army  , the Navy, [and] Military Aviation. Neither the States nor the Municipalities may maintain other forces than those of their police and prison guards, except for those organized by order of the Federal Government. The Army will be formed with the contingent that[,] proportionally to their population[,] is called to service in each one of the States, the Federal District and the Federal Territories and Dependencies. The Law will regulate the formation of citizen militias, without prejudice to the same being able to organize also the system of recruiting   by contract. All of the materiel   of war found within the country or introduced from abroad belongs to the Nation; 9. The legislation concerning public instruction. The elementary primary instruction is obligatory and that provided in official institutes will be gratuitous. 10. All that relative to the formation of the Census and the national Statistics, with the States and the Municipalities having to cooperate in them, following what the Law provides. For all of the acts in which it is necessary to take as [a] basis the population of the Nation as well as of the States, the Federal District and the Federal Territories, the last Census of the Republic approved by the Congress will serve as the norm. The National Census will be made [as] appropriately specified by the Law; 11. All that relative to the organization and regime of the Federal District and the Federal Territories and Dependencies; 12. All that relative to the Venezuelan currency of which type, value, law, weight and minting will be exclusively established by the national laws, and of the circulation of the foreign currency; 13. All that relative to the aerial, maritime and fluvial navigation, the docks and the works of disembarkation at the Ports. The navigation of the rivers and other navigable waters which have not required special works for them may not be restricted with taxes or privilege; -6- 14. All that relative to the customs regime for the collection of import rights, which will be entirely received by the National Treasury  , as well as for the transit of merchandise passing abroad as well as [coming] from abroad. At the Customs Offices the collection will continue, also, while is not eliminated by the Law, of the contribution currently denominated [the] Territorial Tax   which will enter the National Treasury. Exports are free and no tax encumbering them may be established; 15. All that relative to the Mail, [the] Telegraphs, [the] Telephones and [the] wireless communications; 16. All that relative to the opening and the preservation of the national roads, which are, those that pass through a State or the Federal District or a Federal Territory and exit their borders; the aerial traction cables and the railways, even [when] being witihin the borders of a State, except if it concerns urban trams or traction cables, of which [the] concession and regulation is of the competence   of the respective Municipalities; 17. All that relative to the organization, collection and investment of the stamp taxes or fiscal duties, cigarettes, tobacco, registration, inheritances, matches  , spirits   and liquors and the others that with the character of national taxes are established by the Law; 18. All of what is relative to the saline [soils], the vacant lands, the products of them, the pearl beds   and the mines. Each State will retain the ownership   of such assets with respect to those found in its jurisdiction, but the administration of all of them will be at the charge of the Federal Executive, which will exercise it in accordance to what is determined by the respective Laws. That the saline [soils] are inalienable will be established in them; that the mining concessions will be temporary and that the vacant lands can be sold, rented and be awarded at no cost by the Federal Executive as established in the same Laws, in which will be established for such cases, the right of preference in favor of the occupants. The vacant [lands] existing within the maritime, fluvial and lake islands may not be sold, and their exploitation   may only be granted in a form which does not involve directly or indirectly the transfer of the ownership of the land. The Income   from saline [soils], Pearls, Mines, and Vacant Lands, the product from the sale of the latter inclusive, will enter the National Treasury; 19. That relative, within the entire territory of the Nation, to the public works that are necessary, without this hindering the right of the States and Municipalities to undertake on their own account those that they may wish; 20. In general, all of the matters that this Constitution enumerates in the attributions of the different powers which constitute the Federal Government. Article 16 The States obligate themselves to fulfill and have fulfilled and execute the Constitution and the Laws of the Union and the Decrees, orders and Resolutions issued by the Federal Powers in use of their legal attributions and faculties in the matters of federal competence enumerated in the preceding Article. -7- Article 17 [The following] are of the competence of the States: 1. To adopt   their Constitution and the Organic Laws of their Public Powers, in accordance with the principles of this Fundamental Pact; having to adopt, for the appointment of the Municipal Councils, Legislative Assemblies and Deputies to Congress[,] the direct and secret vote, taking as basis the electoral Census, following the Federal Law of the matter. It is a faculty of the States to retain their current names or to change them; 2. To elect their Public Powers in accordance with their Constitutions and Laws, without prejudice that in the Constitutions of the States that so decide, specific   faculties are delegated to the President of the Republic; 3. To administer justice in accordance to the Law by means of their Tribunals, in their respective territories, in all civil or penal processes occurring in them, except for those of which cognizance is reserved, following this Constitution, to the Federal Judges. The resolutions   of the Tribunals of the States will only be subject to the revision of the Federal and Cassation Court, through the recourses established by the Law and with the effects that it establishes; 4. To organize their earnings  , which will be: 1) The  [Constitutional Allocation] formed by a sum which will be included annually in the respective General Budget of Public Expenditures of the Nation, equivalent to twelve percent of the total of the incomes for Earnings, taking as basis for each economic year the total of such income of the immediately prior civil year. The sum so established will be distributed among all of the States, the Federal District and the Federal Territories, proportionally to their populations; 2) The tax for sealed paper, not being able to demand its use in documents relative to the liquidation and payment of the national taxes, nor with the purpose of making effective  , through their use, the contributions that this Constitution prohibits them to impose; 3) The tax on consumption and the other contributions established by the Legislative Assemblies, with the following restrictions: a) The States may not create Customs [offices], because there will only be the national ones, nor may they collect import or export taxes, nor of transit of foreign merchandise passing to foreign territories, nor concerning the earnings matters which constitute federal taxes, nor concerning those that are of Municipal competence, following Article 18; b) They may not tax   the transit of livestock, artifacts or productions of other States, nor the things, regardless of their source  , passing to another State. c) They may not tax the livestock, fruits, artifacts, products or other class of national or foreign merchandise before their being offered for consumption; nor prohibit the consumption of the things produced outside of the State, or encumber them with different taxes than those paid for the same things when they are produced in the locality; d) They may not require the intervention of the federal fiscal administration for the collection of their taxes; -8- e) They may not create taxes payable with personal labor or with its equivalence in money; 5. The exercise of the other rights corresponding to their category of autonomous   entities, which have been reserved in accordance to Article 12 of this Constitution. Article 18 [The following] are of the competence of the Municipalities: 1. To organize their services of police, supplies  , cemeteries, municipal ornamentation, civil architecture, public lighting, aqueducts, urban trams and others of municipal character. The service of hygiene will be done subject to the federal Laws and regulations concerning sanitation, and under the inspection of the federal sanitation service; 2. To administer their own  [public collectively-owned lands] and terrains, without being able to sell them subsequently, except for constructions; 3. To organize their earnings  , with the restrictions enumerated in paragraph 31, number 4 of Article 17 and, also, to not establish patents concerning agriculture, [and] the raising and the fishing of edible fish. These industries may not also be encumbered with national patents or [those] of the States. Article 19 The States and the Municipalities will give entire faith to the public acts and to [the] judicial procedures emanating from the federal authorities, of the other States or of the Federal District and will enforce and execute them. Article 20 Without prejudice to requiring the services of the Powers of the States in all those cases in which they must provide their cooperation to the Federal Government, they may have within their territory: Federal Judges, representatives or agents of the Federal Public Ministry, employees of the Treasury  , Public Instruction, [the] Mail, Telegraphs and Telephones, Sanitation, Customs, Mines, Vacant Lands, the tax functionaries necessary for the collection of the federal taxes, and the forces posted   to the surveillance of the frontiers, for the conservation of public peace, for the garrison   of posts   and fortresses, [the] custody of the parks and the protection of the coasts and ports. The Heads   of these forces and the other federal employees in the States will only have the jurisdiction in what is relative to their respective postings, without any competence   or privilege which differentiates them from the rest of the citizens resident in the respective State, but they will not be able to impose duties on them which are incompatible with the federal service which has been entrusted to them. Article 21 The Federal Government can erect within the territory of the States the forts, docks, warehouses, shipyards, penitentiaries, quarantine stations and works necessary for the federal administration. Article 22 The States will not allow within their Territory recruitments   or levies   which have as their objective to attack the peace, liberty or independence of other nations or the disturbance of the internal peace of the Republic. -9- Article 23 Neither may the States declare or make war between them in any case, having to always maintain strict neutrality in the dissension that occurs among other States, while they are not [being] required to participate   by the Federal Government, which must be obeyed in the measures that it dictates for the reestablishment of the peace. Article 24 Neither the States nor the Municipalities may negotiate loans   from abroad, and what is set forth in Article 50 of this Constitution will govern in the contracts entered into. Article 25 The States enumerated in Article 49 can unite, two or more, to form one sole State, but always retaining the freedom to recover their autonomy. In either case the Federal Executive, the Congress and the other States will be informed. Article 26 In all public acts and official documents of the Nation, of the States, of the Federal District, [of the] Federal Territories and [of the] Municipalities, the [date] of Independence, to be counted as of 19 of April of 1810, and of the Federation, as of 20 of February of 1859, will be cited as well as the date of the calendar. Second Title Of Venezuelans and Their Duties and Rights Article 27 The Venezuelan nationality is held by birth and acquired by naturalization. Article 28 Venezuelans by birth are: 1. All those born in the territory of the Republic; 2. The children of Venezuelan parents, whatever their places of birth may be. Article 29 Venezuelans by naturalization are: 1. The children of majority of age, of father and mother Venezuelan by naturalization, born outside of the territory of the Republic, if coming to be domiciled in the country and having manifested their will to be Venezuelans; 2. Those born or who are to be born in the Ibero-American Republics, as long as they have established their residency in the territory of the Republic and have manifested their will to be Venezuelans; 3. The foreigners who have obtained or who shall obtain a naturalization document   in accordance with the Law; 4. The foreigner [feminine] married to a Venezuelan [masculine], while the marriage subsists or when, if it is dissolved and during the year following the dissolution, [she] manifests her will to continue being Venezuelan [feminine]. Article 30 The manifestations of will to which numbers 1, 2 and 4 of the prior Article refer must be made before the Principal Registrar of the respective jurisdiction in which the interested [person] establishes their domicile, and the same, when receiving them, will extend the respective Protocol and will send a copy of it to the Federal - 10 - Executive for its publication in the  [Official Gazette] prior to the procedures established by the Law. Nationality will not be considered acquired while the expressed publication is not verified. Article 31 Venezuelans have the duty of defending the Country   and to fulfill and to obey the Constitution and [the] Laws of the Republic, and the Decrees, orders and Resolutions that are dictated for their execution, in accordance with their attributions, [by] the Public Powers. They may not commit to serve against Venezuela and if they do so they will be castigated, conforming to what the Law determines [for] traitors to the Country. Article 32 The Nation guarantees to Venezuelans: 1. The inviolability of life, without having any Law or any mandate of any authority being able to establish or apply the death penalty; 2. Property, which will only be subject to the legal contributions and to be taken for works of public utility, by means of a contradictory trial and a prior indemnification, as determined by the Law. Owners will also be obligated to observe the provisions concerning public hygiene, the conservation of the forests and waters, and others similar established by the Laws in benefit of the community; 3. The inviolability of postal correspondence, of the telegraph and the other individual   papers which can only be taken   by disposition of the competent judicial authority and with the formalities established by the Laws, but always retaining the respective secrecy of the domestic and private [matters] which do not have relation to the trial that is being made public  ; 4. The inviolability of the domestic home, which may not be searched   except to impede the perpetration or the consummation of an offense or to fulfill the decisions that in accordance with the Law, are dictated by the Tribunals of Justice in the processes of which they take cognizance. The same will also be subject to sanitation visits in accordance with the Law; 5. Personal liberty and by it: a) Forced recruitment for service in arms is abolished; it will be rendered in accordance to what the Law provides; b) Slavery is proscribed   forever and the slaves who set foot on the territory of the Republic will be free; c) Everyone has the right to do whatever does not prejudice others, and no one is obligated to do what is not legally ordered, or impeded from executing what the Law does not prohibit; 6. The freedom of thought manifested by words, in writing or through the press, but remaining subject to penalty, conforming to what the Law determines, the expressions constituting slander  , libel  , defamation, outrage   or instigation to delinquency. Communist propaganda is also prohibited; 7. The freedom to transit without a passport, to move [their] domicile, observing the legal formalities, to leave the Republic and to return to it, taking and bringing their assets; - 11 - 8. The freedom of work and of the industries, except for the prohibitions and limitations required by the public order and good customs. In consequence, monopolies for the exclusive exercise of any industry may not be granted. Temporary privileges may only be granted, in accordance to the Law, relative to intellectual property, to patents of invention and trademarks, and those that are accorded, also conforming to the Law and for a specific   time, for the establishment and exploitation of the railways, aerial navigation companies, canals, trams, telephone or telegraph lines and wireless communication systems, when such works arise   or are installed to the cost of the concessionary, without the Nation or the States guaranteeing to them proceeds   or subventions  ; 9. The freedom of assembly   without arms, publicly or privately, without the authorities being able to exercise any act of duress  ; and that of association, this remaining subject to the restrictions and prohibitions established by the Laws; 10. The freedom of petition before any public functionary or official corporation, with right to obtain a timely response for the respective request or representation; 11. The right to accuse the functionaries[,] who incur in a breach of their duties[,] before the competent Tribunals; 12. The right to suffrage, and in consequence all Venezuelans, older than twenty- one years [of age], who are not subject to interdiction or to a penal conviction that involves political disqualification  , are electors and eligible for all the public offices, without greater restrictions than those in the Constitution, and those that derive from the special conditions of competence or capacity that are required by the Laws for the exercise of specific offices; 13. The freedom to teach; 14. Religious freedom, under the supreme inspection of all the beliefs   by the Federal Executive with arrangement to the Laws, and the right of Ecclesiastical Patronage referred to by Article 52 always remaining safe; 15. Individual security, and by it: a) No citizen may be imprisoned or arrested for debts which do not derive   from an offense; b) Nor be tried by specially created Tribunals or Commissions except by their natural Judges and by virtue of the preexisting Law; c) Nor be imprisoned or detained without preceding summary information of a punishable act having been committed that merits corporal punishment and written order of the functionary decreeing the detention, with expression of the motive that causes it, unless being caught in flagante delicto. The summary [ /criminal dossier] may not, in any case, be extended for more than thirty days after the detention; d) Nor be [held] incommunicado; e) Nor be obligated to render oath nor to suffer interrogation in a criminal cause against oneself, or against their ascendants, or their relatives, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, or against the spouse; f) Nor continue in detention if through a firm judicial decision the foundations which motivated it would be destroyed, or after having rendered sufficient bail in the cases in which, with the process still pending, the Law permits freedom under bail; all following what it determines; - 12 - g) Nor be convicted to suffer punishment in criminal matters except after having being notified personally of the charges and [being] heard in the form that the Law indicates; h) Nor be convicted to corporal punishment for more than twenty years nor to infamous penalties. There will no perpetual penalties, even if not being corporal; i) Nor to be tried a second time for the same punishable act; 16. Equality, by virtue of which: a) All must be tried by the same Laws, [all] will enjoy equal protection from them in all the territory of the Nation and will be subject to the same duties, services and contributions, exonerations from them not being able to be granted except in the cases that the Law permits; b) Titles of nobility will not be granted, or distinctions based on heredity  , or employments or offices of which salaries or emoluments last for more time than the service; c) Official honorifics other than that of a [“]citizen[”] and of [“]your[”] , except for diplomatic formulas[,] will not be given. Article 33 The preceding enunciation of rights must not be understood as a negation of any others that could correspond to the citizens and which are not comprehended in it. Article 34 No federal Law, nor the constitutions or the Laws of the States, nor the Municipal Ordinances, may diminish   or damage the rights guaranteed to the citizens; those doing so will be null, and will be declared by the Federal and Cassation Court as such. Article 35 The [persons] issuing, signing, executing or sending to execute Decrees, Ordinances or Resolution that violate any of the rights guaranteed to the citizens, are guilty, and will be castigated in accordance to the Law, except if it concerns measures directed to the defense of the Republic or the conservation or reestablishment of the peace, dictated by competent public functionaries, in their official character, in the cases provided for in the following Article. Article 36 When the Republic is found involved in an international war or a civil war explodes within itself, or [the] imminent danger of one or the other occurring exists, the President of the Republic, in [the] Council of Ministers, will so declare and will suspend the constitutional guarantees in all the territory of the Nation or within the Section that the Decree itself specifies; but this suspension will not have effect once   the peace is reestablished and will be subject to the following restrictions: 1. In no case may anyone be deprived of life, which will always be inviolable, nor may infamous punishments be decreed or applied; 2. Confiscations of assets   will not be decreed or arise, except, uniquely, as measures of retaliation in international war, against the nationals of the country with which it is at war, if this [country] should have previously decreed the confiscation of assets of Venezuelans; 3. The national or foreign individuals who are opposed to the reestablishment or conservation of the peace can be arrested, confined or expelled from the territory - 13 - of the Republic; but such measures will cease on the circumstances which motivated them terminating, except for the expulsion of foreigners, which the Federal Executive may not revoke if not deemed appropriate. Third Title Of Foreigners Article 37 The rights and duties of the foreigners are determined by the Law, but in no case may they be greater than those of the Venezuelans. Article 38 The foreigners, domiciled and transient, who take part in the Venezuelan political contests   will remain subject to the same responsibilities of Venezuelans and to what is provided for in number 3 of Article 36. Article 39 In no case may the nationals or the foreigners assert   that the Nation or the States or the Municipalities should indemnify them for damages, prejudices or expropriations, which have not been executed by legitimate authorities working within their public character. Fourth Title Of Sovereignty and the Public Power Article 40 Sovereignty resides in the people, who exercise it by means of the public powers. Article 41 The definition of attributions and faculties specifies the limits of the public powers; all that oversteps   such definition constitutes a usurpation of attributions. Article 42 The Law will determine all that relative to the nullity of the acts executed with an overstepping   of faculties. Article 43 Every decision accorded by direct or indirect requisition of the force[,] or from an assembly[,] of the people with a subversive posture   is null. Article 44 Except for that provided for in Article 102, the exercise of the public power carries  , for all federal functionaries, of the States and [of the] municipalities[,] individual responsibility, with the sanction established by the Law, for overstepping of the faculties granted by the Constitution or for breaking of the Law that organizes the functions of the respective office  . All of the public functionaries remain, also, subject to penalty, in accordance to the Law, for any other crime that they commit. Article 45 The military authority and the civil [authority] will never be exercised simultaneously by the same functionary, except [by] the President of the Republic, or in case of war, when in accordance to the Law[,] military functions are attributed to a civil employee. - 14 - Article 46 No individual may perform at the same time more than one lucrative public posting  . The acceptance of a second posting of this kind   equals the renunciation of the first, except with regards to Substitutions while the Substitute does not replace the Principal, and with respect to employments in Academies, Hospitals, incidental Courts   and institutions of teaching. Article 47 The armed force may not deliberate; it is passive and obedient. No armed corps may make requisitions or demand aid of any kind   except to the civil authorities and in the mode and form determined by the Law. In the electoral periods the troops will remain in garrison  . The Heads   of the forces who infringe these provisions will be tried and castigated in accordance with the Laws. Article 48 No tax   may be collected that is not authorized by the Law nor will any expense be made from the National Treasury for which a quantity has not been applied by the Congress in the Law of the General Budget of Public Earnings and Expenditures, unless that for the expense there has been previously agreed an Additional Credit by means of an Executive Decree. Those that infringe this provision will be civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the quantities of which payment should have been effected. Article 49 No public employee may accept  , while being [in office], gifts  , charges  , honors or rewards from foreign Governments without the previous corresponding authorization of the Senate. Those that infringe these provisions will be castigated in accordance with what the Law determines. Article 50 No contract of public interest celebrated with the Federal Government or with the States, or with the Municipalities or with any other public power, may be transferred, in whole or in part, to foreign Governments; and in all of them will be considered incorporated, even if not expressly, the following clause: “The doubts and controversies of any nature that could arise concerning this contract and which cannot be resolved amicably by the contracting parties, will be decided by the competent Tribunals of Venezuela, in accordance with its Laws, without being for any reason or cause the origin of foreign claims”. Neither can those contracts be made with companies   not legally domiciled in Venezuela, nor admit the transfer to them of those celebrated with third parties. Article 51 The public power is distributed between the Federal Power, that of the States and the Municipal [Power], with the limits established by this Constitution. The Federal Power is divided into the Legislative, Executive and [the] Judicial. Article 52 With the Nation [being] in possession of the right   of Ecclesiastical Patronage, the same will exercise it in accordance to what is determined by the Law of 28 of July of 1824. - 15 - Article 53 The Law will regulate all that relative to the oath to fulfill the duties which must be rendered by the national employees when taking possession of their postings  . Article 54 The federal constitutional periods will be counted from 19 of April of 1922 and will last seven years; within them the Legislative Power will be renewed, as determined in this Constitution. Fifth Title Of the Legislative Power First Section Of the Congress Article 55 The Legislative Power is exercised by an Assembly that will be denominated [the] “Congress of the United States of Venezuela”, composed of two Chambers, one of Deputies and another of Senators. Both of these will remain in their functions [for] three years. The Deputies will remain in their functions [for] three years and will be renewed in their totality. Second Section Of the Chamber of Deputies Article 56 To form part of the Chamber of Deputies each State will elect, by direct vote and in accordance with the Law of Elections, one Deputy for each thirty-five thousand inhabitants and one more for each excess of fifteen thousand. The State having [a] population which does not reach thirty-five thousand inhabitants will elect one Deputy. In like manner substitutes will be elected, in equal number to that of the Principals, to substitute for them in the vacancies that occur, by the order of their election. Article 57 To be a Deputy it is required to be Venezuelan by birth and to have completed twenty-one years [of age]. Article 58 The Federal District and the Federal Territories which would have or would reach the base of population established in Article 56, will also elect their Deputies by direct vote and with the formalities determined by the Law. The indigenous [people] not suppressed will not be counted within the base populations. Article 59 Proprietary attributions of the Chamber of Deputies are: 1. To give a vote of censorship to the Ministers of the Office   whose acts merit it, to the judgment   of the Chamber, except the President of the Republic will not be obligated to remove them while the Federal and Cassation Court does not declare that there is a legal motive to submit them to trial; 2. The others that the Laws specify. - 16 - Third Section Of the Chamber of the Senate Article 60 To form this Chamber the Legislative Assembly of each State will elect, from outside of itself  , two Principal Senators and two Substitutes to fill the vacancies of those by the order of their election. Article 61 To be a Senator it is required to be Venezuelan by birth and to be older than thirty years of age. Article 62 The attributions of the Chamber of the Senate are: 1. To accord to illustrious Venezuelans, after twenty-five years from their death, the honor of having their remains deposited in the National Pantheon; 2. To give   or not [give] their consent to the national employees to accept gifts, charges, honors or rewards from foreign Governments, without which they may not accept them; 3. To give   or not [give] their consent for the promotion of military officers from Coronel, and of the navy from Captain of the Navy[,] inclusive; 4. The others that the Laws specify. Fourth Section Provisions Common to Both Chambers Article 63 The Legislative Chambers will meet each year in the Capital of the Union on the day of 19 of April or the most immediate one, without the necessity of being convoked previously. The sessions will last ninety non-extendable days; within this time   all of the days and hours will be workable and all of those celebrated in it will be considered as ordinary sessions. The Legislative Chambers can also meet in extraordinary sessions, when they are convoked to Congress by the Executive Power, but in this case matters different   from those that have been expressed in the convocation   may not be dealt with, during such sessions, unless that when legislating concerning them it would be required also to reform the legislation that governs concerning related   matters. Article 64 The Chambers will open their sessions with the two-thirds part of their members, at least, and with the lack of this number those participating will declare themselves in Preparatory Commission and will adopt   the measures that are appropriate for the attendance of those absent. After the opening session[,] those following may be celebrated with the attendance of the absolute majority of the members of the respective Chamber. Article 65 The sessions will be public, but they can be secret when the Chamber so agrees. - 17 - The Chambers have the right: Article 66 1) To adopt their respective Internal Regulation and [Regulation] of Debates and to agree on the correction of those who infringe it; 2) To establish the policy of the building in which they celebrate their sessions; 3) To correct or castigate the spectators who fail   the established order; 4) To remove the obstacles which oppose the legal exercise of their functions; 5) To mandate execution of their proprietary resolutions; 6) To qualify their members and hear their resignations. Article 67 The Chambers will function as one same population  , they will open and close their sessions on a same day and at the same hour and neither of the two may suspend them or change residency without the consent of the other. In case of divergence they will meet in Congress and that which is resolved will be effected. Article 68 The exercise of any public posting is incompatible, during the sessions, with the office of Senator or Deputy. Article 69 The Law will designate the emoluments which shall be received, for their services, by the members of the Congress, emoluments which may not be augmented except for the immediate following period. Article 70 The Senators and Deputies, from thirty days prior to 19 of April until thirty days after the end of the sessions, will enjoy immunity and by such virtue, they may not: 1) Be imprisoned, arrested, confined or in any manner detained or hindered   from the exercise of their functions even when incurring in an offense within such time. If the punishable act that is attributed to them would merit corporal punishment, the summary proceeding   will remain stayed  , while the immunity lasts, without governing in this case with respect to the duration of the summary, the precept contained in letter c), guarantee 15, Article 32 of this Constitution, but all of the diligences conducive to the investigation of the fact will be carried out  ; 2) Be obligated to answer to complaints or to absolve oath or positions during the same time, which will not be counted within the judicial intervals   of the respective process. The Chambers will in no case be able to search   their members such that their immunity is violated. Article 71 The members of the Chambers are not responsible for the opinions that they emit in them. Article 72 The Senators and Deputies may not celebrate with the Federal Executive their own contracts or [those] with others  , or process before it the claims of others  . - 18 - Article 73 When by death or any other cause which produces an absolute vacancy the list of the Substitutes of Senators for a State should be exhausted, or their number is reduced, the respective Legislative Assembly will fill the vacancy or vacancies which have occurred, for the time in default   of the legislative period. With regards to the absences which should occur in the Chamber of Deputies, the Constitutions of the States and the Organic Law of the Federal District will determine the number to substitute for them. Fifth Section Of the Chambers Meeting in Congress Article 74 The Chambers will function separately, but will gather in Congress when this Constitution or the Laws so determine and when one of the Chambers believes it necessary. If convoked  , it falls to the invited [Chamber] to establish the day and the time of the meeting. Article 75 The acts sanctioned by the Legislative Chambers functioning separately as Co- legislative Bodies will be denominated “ ” [Laws], and those sanctioned when gathered in Congress, or separately for the proprietary matters of each, will be called “ ” [Agreements]. Article 76 The Congress will be presided over by the President of the Senate and that of the Chamber of Deputies will be the Vice-President. Article 77 The Chambers meeting in Congress have the following attributions: 1) To practice the elections that this Constitution and the Laws attributes to them to make; 2) To take cognizance of the resignation of the President of the United States of Venezuela; 3) To examine the annual Message to be presented by the President of the Republic; 4) To examine and to approve or to disapprove the Reports   and Accounts that must be presented by the Ministers of the Office, in accordance with Article 109 of this Constitution; 5) To elevate to the category of States of the Nation those Federal Territories which solicit it, as long as they fulfill the conditions provided for in Article 1 of this Constitution; 6) To examine the Additional Credits dictated by the Federal Executive and grant their approval if it should agree with the procedures indicated in attribution 30 of Article 100. Sixth Section Of the Attributions Common to Both Chambers as Co-legislative Bodies Article 78 The Chamber of Deputies and [the Chamber] of the Senate functioning as Co- legislative Bodies, have the following attributions: - 19 - 1) To decree all the national taxes  ; 2) To decree the business   concerning the National Credit and to determine all that relative to the National Debt; 3) To create and suppress the national employments and, in general, to legislate with regards to the functioning of the Federal Power; 4) To legislate concerning the national currency, establishing its type, value, law, weight and minting[,] and concerning the admission and circulation of foreign currency, but in no case or for any reason may the forced circulation of bank bills   be decreed or authorized, nor of any represented value, in paper, maintaining always the gold standard  ; 5) To approve or to deny the diplomatic treaties and conventions, [and concerning] those without the requirement, their approval will not be valid nor may [they] be ratified or exchanged  . The Law of approval dictated by the Congress will not receive the [order of] Execution[,] except only when the treaty is accepted by the other party. The treaties will not be officially published except only when they have been ratified and exchanged; 6) To approve or to deny the contracts for the construction of the railways, aerial traction cables, the establishment of telegraphic or wireless communications, immigration and the others of national interest, authorized by this Constitution or the Laws, which are celebrated by the Federal Executive. The mining concessions or the titles of vacant lands that are granted in accordance to the respective Laws are not subject to the approval of the Congress; 7) To authorize the Executive Power to sell the immovable assets of national ownership; 8) To establish and make uniform the national weights and measurements in accordance with the decimal metric system; 9. To sanction the Law of the General Budget of Public Earnings and Expenditures, in which the granting of the federal employments and all that relative to the expenditures   which shall be conducted within the respective economic year[,] is determined. The Congress may not, outside of the expenditures included in the cited Law[,] order that of any other determined sum, by means of special Laws or by agreements; 10. To examine, and to approve if [it is] considered duly executed, the National Census each time it is conducted, and to this effect the Federal Executive will submit it to the Congress; 11. To establish the special regime of administration applicable to the Federal Territories; 12. To establish the augmentation that is necessary on the basis of the population for the election of [the] Deputies in accordance to the last approved Census; 13. To adopt the Law of general character concerning civil positions  , retirements, withdrawals and military pensions  , paid by the National Treasury. In the Law of the General Budget of Public Earnings and Expenditures the National Congress will establish the partition or global partitions that are allocated to cover these expenditures and the Federal Executive will duly distribute them, granting in each individual   case the respective document   by - 20 - organ of the Minister to which it corresponds, all following what the Law determines; 14. To decree war and to require the Executive to negotiate peace; 15. To dictate the Law for the formation and replacement of the forces of land and sea; 16. To grant amnesties; 17. To legislate concerning all that relative to the security of the ports and the coasts; 18. To legislate concerning: [the] electoral census, Public Instruction, [the] organization of the national Treasury  , aerial, maritime and fluvial [navigation], Docks, [the] Mail, [the] Telegraph, Wireless Communications, Railways, national Roads and the transit over them of vehicles of mechanical traction, [the] unoccupied Lands, Saline [soils], [the] Fishing of pearls and Mines; 19. To legislate concerning the other matters enunciated in number 4 of Article 15 and, in general, concerning all that are of federal competence. Seventh Section Of the Formation of the Laws Article 79 The Laws can be initiated in any of the Chambers when the bill is presented by at least three of the members of it. The initiative corresponds also to the Executive Power by [the] Organ of the Ministry to which Office belongs the competence of the matter of the bill. Article 80 After a bill has been presented it will be read and considered to be admitted, and if it should be so [admitted] three discussions will be granted with an interval of at least a day one from the other, observing the rules that have been established for the debates. Article 81 The bill approved in the Chamber in which [it] was initiated will pass to the other to be discussed in it in the same form established in the prior Article. If it should not be denied it will return to the Chamber of origin with the alterations that it has suffered. Article 82 If the initiating Chamber should not admit the alterations, it can insist on its bill[,]sending its written reasons to the other, and if the latter admits them, the Law will remain sanctioned. If not, the Chambers will gather in Congress and in it the Articles in which there is discrepancy and those related will be subject to a new discussion, deciding by majority of votes, being able to agree   in giving them a different wording   than the one adopted in either Chamber. Article 83 The bills rejected in the sessions of one year may not be presented again until   those of the year following or subsequent. Article 84 The bills that remain pending in any of the Chambers, at the end of the sessions, will not return to be discussed except through a new presentation in the sessions of - 21 - the year following or of those subsequent, and therefore they must sustain the same discussions as if they were new. Article 85 In the Laws this formula will be used: “The Congress of the United States of Venezuela, Decrees:”. Article 86 The Law which reforms another will be re-worded entirely and will abrogate   the prior one in all its parts. Article 87 The Laws are abrogated with the same formalities established for the sanction. Article 88 The legislative acts, once sanctioned, will be drawn up   in duplicates conforming to how they remain worded in the sustained discussions, without being able to make to the text either modifications or alterations; both examples   will be signed by the President, [the] Vice-President and the Secretaries of the Congress, with the date of their definitive approval; one of such examples will be sent to the President of the Republic to be countersigned   jointly with the respective Minister or Ministers and to be published in the  . Article 89 In case of evident error in the printing of the Law it will return to be published [as] corrected, in the  , or the respective statement of errors [ errata] will be inserted in it, certified by the Minister or the Ministers who would have countersigned the Law. Article 90 The Law will enter into force on the date it specifies, and if not indicated it will commence to govern from its publication in the  . Article 91 The faculty to legislate which corresponds to the Congress is not delegable. Article 92 No legislative provision will have a retroactive effect except when it imposes a lesser penalty. The procedural Laws will be applied from their entrance into force, even in the processes found in course; but in this case the evidence found applicable   will be considered  , in what is of benefit to the inmate  , being a penal trial, in accordance to the Law in effect when it was promoted. Sixth Title Of the Executive Power First Section Of the Administration Article 93 All that relative to the Federal Administration, which is not attributed to another authority by this Constitution, is of the competence of the Federal Executive Power and it is exercised by a Magistrate denominated [the] President of the United States of Venezuela. - 22 - Article 94 The Executive Power will enforce its determinations and will exercise the General Administration entrusted to it by means of the federal employees and agents determined by the Laws, without prejudice to claiming the assistance of the Governments of the States in the cases permitted by this Constitution. Second Section Of the President of the United States of Venezuela Article 95 The President of the United States of Venezuela must be Venezuelan by birth, be over thirty years of age, be of secular estate and be in possession of his civil and political rights. Article 96 Within the first fifteen days from his installation, in the year in which the respective term   commences, the Chambers of the Senate and of Deputies will gather in Congress to make the election of the President of the United States of Venezuela. The session of the Congress in which the election provided for in this Article will be practiced, will be established with at least five days of anticipation, and such specification   will be published in the  . Article 97 The temporary absences of the President of the Republic will be substituted by the Minister of the Office designated by him. In case of the absolute absence of the President, the Congress will provide for the office, with the formalities indicated in the prior Article, for the time of default of the respective term. If the Congress should not be found meeting in ordinary sessions, it will be convoked to extraordinary sessions by the Minister[,] in conformity with the part following[,] exercising the Presidency. Until   the [person] elected by the Congress takes possession of the Presidency of the Republic, the Minister that from the date on which the absolute absence occurred should be in charge of it will exercise it on an interim basis, in accordance to the first part of this Article; and if no one should be in charge, the Minister appointed by the Cabinet by majority of votes will exercise it under the same interim condition. Article 98 For the effects of the prior Article absence from the Capital will not be considered as a temporary absence of the President, as long as he does not leave the territory of the Republic. In any point   found here, even if outside of the cases expressly provided for in numbers 24 (paragraph b) and 25 of Article 100, [the President] can communicate his instructions to the Ministers of the Office for the Resolutions that are necessary to be issued in the Capital. The President can also exercise, in any place   in the Republic where he is found, attribution 2 of Article 100. Article 99 The President of the Republic will render oath before the Congress to faithfully and loyally fulfill his duties. If by any circumstance he cannot do so before the Congress, he will render this oath before the Federal and Cassation Court. - 23 - Third Section Of the Attributions of the President of the United States of Venezuela Article 100 [The following] are attributions of the President of the United States of Venezuela: 1. To appoint and remove the Ministers of the Office; 2. To receive the Public Ministers of other Nations in accordance with the practices of International Law; 3. To sign the official Documents   directed to the Heads of State; 4. To administer the Federal Districts following the Law; 5. To Administer the Federal Territories in accordance with their Organic Laws; 6. To provide for the temporary entrustment   of the Presidency of the Republic to any of the Ministers of the Office, when deemed appropriate, being able to take charge of it again at any time during the constitutional term; 7. To mandate to be executed and to see to compliance with and execution of this Constitution and the Laws, and to have them published in the  as soon as possible once having received them, except for that provided for in attribution 3 of Article 78; 8. To issue, in [the] Council of Ministers, Decrees and Regulations for the better execution of the Laws, seeing to not altering their spirit, purpose or reason; 9. To negotiate, by [the] organ of the respective Minister and with the approval of the Cabinet, the business decreed by the Congress, in full conformity to their provisions; 10. To regulate, in [the] Council of Ministers, the Services of Sanitation, Mail, Telegraphs and public or private Telephones; 11. To decree, in [the] Council of Ministers, the measures necessary to conduct the Census of the Republic at the time   indicated by the Law and to submit it later to the approval of the Congress; 12. To have issued, by the Minister of the branch, patents of navigation for the national ships, in accordance to what is determined by the Law; 13. To have issued, by the respective Minister, documents of nationality in accordance with the Law; 14. To appoint, by [the] organ of the Minister of competence, the national employees whose election is not attributed to another functionary and to remove them when deemed appropriate; 15. To decree in [the] Council of Ministers, the creation and endowment   of the new public services which are necessary in the recess of the Legislative Chambers; 16. To provide, by [the] organ of the competent Minister and with the approval of the Cabinet, that the Federal Public Ministry initiate   accusation against the employees who give motive for this procedure; 17. To extraordinarily convoke the Congress with the approval of the Council of Ministers, when the graveness of any matter demands it; 18. To declare war, in name of the Republic, when so decreed by the Congress; 19. To administer, by [the] organ of the respective Ministers, the Public Earnings of the Nation in accordance with this Constitution and the Laws; - 24 - 20. To personally direct, or by [the] organ of the Minister to whom it corresponds, the diplomatic negotiations, and celebrate, through the Plenipotentiaries elected by and with the approval of the Council of Ministers[,] every kind of Treaty with other Nations, submitting them to the Legislative Chambers for the effects of attribution 5 of Article 78. In no case will international treaties be celebrated with diminishment of the precepts established in Articles 37, 38 and 39; and in those that are celebrated the following clause will be included: “All the differences between the parties, relative to the interpretation or execution of this Treaty, will be decided by arbitration”; 21. To celebrate, by [the] organ of the Minister or Ministers with competence and with the approval of the Council of Ministers, the contracts of national interest permitted by this Constitution and the Laws and to submit them to the Congress; 22. To prohibit, when deemed appropriate, the entrance of foreigners into the national territory, and to expel them in the cases permitted by International Law or provided for in the Laws of the Republic; 23. To direct the war and to command the Army and the Navy in person, or to appoint whoever will do so, and to organize the National Army and the [National] Militias in accordance to the Law, establishing the number of the land and sea forces; 24. To decree the suspension of the guarantees in the cases provided for in Article 36, and during civil or international war [he] will also be able to [do so]: a) Request   of the States the aid necessary for the national defense or [defense] of the institutions; b) To specify the site where all or some of the Powers of the Federation will transitorily relocate, when grave motive exists for it; c) To provide for the trial by treason to the Country of the Venezuelans who in some manner have been hostile to [the] national defense or who voluntarily cause prejudice to the interests of the Union; d) To reorganize the States which were dominated by rebel forces or of which [their] own Governments participated in the rebellion; e) To issue letters patent [ letters of marque] and authorize responses  ; 25. To declare [an] official visit, jointly with all or some of the Ministers of the Office, to specific States of the Union and Federal Territories. During the official visit[,] the seat of the Federal Executive Power will be the site where the President is found. In the same Decree in which the visit is ordered all that relative to the office, in Caracas, of current administrative matters[,] will be regulated; 26. To make use of the public force to put an end to armed conflict   between two or more States when the interposition of his good offices   proves insufficient; 27. To exercise, with respect to the States, the functions delegated to him in their respective Constitutions; 28. To grant pardons; 29. To have issued, by the Minister of competence, the titles of adjudication or lease   of [the] vacant lands and of the mining concessions, in accordance with the Laws; - 25 - 30. To decree, in [the] Council of Ministers, the Additional Credits to the Budget of Public Expenditures, when they are necessary due to the sum established for the respective Chapter in the Law of the General Budget of Public Earnings and Expenditures being insufficient or for not having provided for the expense, and as long as that funds to cover the Additional Credit should be in the National Treasury, without prejudice to the ordinary expenditures which will be preferred to the extraordinary ones. Article 101 The President of the Republic will present, in all years, to the Congress, within the first ten days of its ordinary sessions, personally or through one of his Ministers, a Message in which he will give account of the acts of his administration and of the state of the Republic. In the year referred to by Article 103 this Message will be presented on the day of 19 of April, or, if the Legislative Chambers should not have met, the exiting President will leave it, signed, in the power of the  [person Entrusted] of the Presidency, in order for the same to remit it to Congress when it is installed. Article 102 The President of the Republic is only responsible for treason to the Country and for common offences. Article 103 The President of the Republic will remain in the exercise of his functions from [the date of] rendering of his oath provided for in Article 99 until 19 of April of the year in which the respective period terminates; and [on] the same day he will deliver the Executive Power to the Member   of the Federal and Cassation Court that it designates in accordance with number 17 of Article 120. Fourth Section Of the Ministers of the Office   Article 104 The President of the United States of Venezuela will exercise the attributions given by this Constitution through the Ministers of the Office specified by the Law. It will determine their functions and duties and will organize their Departments. Article 105 The Ministers are the only and precise legal organs of the President of the United States of Venezuela. All of the Decrees will be countersigned   by the Minister or Ministers to whose branches it corresponds, and they will issue the resolutions and orders that the President mandates them to dictate, within their attributions. The provisions of the President will lack efficacy without the expressed requirement, except the appointments of the same Ministers and the disposition provided for in attribution 6 of Article 100. In what is relative to the administration of the Federal District[,] the legal organ of the President will be a Governor, of his free election and removal. Article 106 To be Minister of the Office it is required to be Venezuelan by birth, to be over thirty years of [age] and to be in possession of one’s civil and political rights. Article 107 The decisions of the President of the United States of Venezuela, in the exercise of his legal attributions, will be agreed to in Cabinet, that is, in a  [Board] or - 26 - Council of all of the Ministers of the Office, when such [a] meeting is required in this Constitution or the Laws, or when the President deems it appropriate to convoke the Cabinet, in accordance with the entity   or importance of the matters   that have to be dealt with; even more so when the matter   corresponds solely to one of the Offices and no express legal provision exists requiring its consideration in Cabinet, [it] will be sufficient that the Minister or Ministers who are competent, countersign or mandate the execution of that provided for by the President. Article 108 All of the acts of the Ministers must be in agreement with this Constitution and the Laws; their personal responsibility is not safeguarded by the order of the President, even if received in a written manner. Such responsibility is joint   for all of the Ministers with regards to the acts of the President resolved in Cabinet. Article 109 The Ministers will give account to the Congress, each year, within the first ten days of their sessions, in reasoned and documented Reports  , of what was done and deemed appropriate to be done in their respective branches. They will also present the account of the funds that they should have handled. Especially, the Minister to whose Office the General Administration of the Incomes   of the Nation corresponds, will timely present to the Congress, each year, the Bill of the Law of the General Budget of Public Earnings and Expenditures that will be prepared by him in consultation with the other Ministers of the Office. In the year referred to by Article 103 the Ministers will present their Reports and Accounts on the day [of] 19 of April, and should the Legislative Chambers still not have been installed, they will leave them with the  of the Presidency of the Republic with the objective that he remits it to the Congress at its meeting. Article 110 The Ministers have the right to speak   in the Chambers and will be obligated to participate in them when they are called to report  . Seventh Section Of the Federal Public Ministry Article 111 The Federal Public Ministry is the organ of the Federal Executive before the Federal Judicial Power and before the States, when it is necessary to relate to them   in accordance with this Constitution and the Laws. Article 112 The Federal Public Ministry will be the charge of a functionary called [the] Procurator General of the Nation   and of the employees of his dependency. Article 113 The Procurator General of the Nation is of [the] free election and removal of the President of the United States of Venezuela. Respecting the employees of its dependency the Law will determine that relative to their appointment. - 27 - Article 114 Attributions of the Procurator General are: 1. To see, personally or through the employees of his dependency, in the cases and in the form established by the Law, that in the Federal Tribunals, [and Tribunals] of the States and Municipalities, the Laws in the penal processes will be applied with rectitude  , and in all of those in which the National Treasury, the public order or good customs have interest; 2. To carry out   the juridical reports   so called for by the Federal Executive or the Federal and Cassation Court; 3. To initiate  , personally or through the functionaries of his dependency, at the initiation   of the Federal Executive and before the competent authority, accusations against the federal functionaries that have given motive to be tried; 4. To exercise, before the Federal and Cassation Court, the Prosecuting Ministry in the trials referred to by attributions 1, 2 and 3 of Article 120; 5. To represent and sustain, on his own or through the functionaries of his dependency indicated by the Law and that in every case will act   under his direction, the rights   of the Nation in all of the trials in which it is a party; 6. To fulfill the other duties that the Laws specify. Article 115 The Procurator General of the Nation will exercise his functions attending to the instructions that, in accordance with the Law, are communicated by the Federal Executive by [the] organ of the Minister to whose branch the matter corresponds. Eight Title Of the Judicial Power First Section Fundamental Provisions Article 116 The Judicial Power of the Republic resides in the Federal and Cassation Court and in the other Tribunals and Courts established by the Laws. Article 117 All of the Federal Judges will be appointed for a specific term   during which they will not be able to be removed from their offices except in the cases determined by the Law. Second Section Of the Federal and Cassation Court Article 118 The Federal and Cassation Court will be composed of seven Members  , who must be Venezuelan by birth, be over thirty years of age and [be] lawyers of the Republic, who will remain in their functions for seven years, but at the expiration of it they will remain in the exercise of them while those that are to replace them have not taken possession [of office]. The Court will act constituted in Chambers   in accordance to what is determined by the Law, which will establish the number of Members that each Chamber has [in order] to function. - 28 - Article 119 The election of the Members of the Federal and Cassation Court will be made by the Congress within the first thirty days of its sessions, in the year in which the respective Constitutional period commences, the voting being made separately for each one of the Members, [with] those that result with the absolute majority being appointed. In equal form and in the same   session, seven substitute Members, successively numbered, will be elected who, in the same order, will fill the absolute or temporary absences   of the principals. The Court will provide for the incidental [absences] in accordance with what the Law indicates. When the list of Substitutes remains incomplete, the Congress will complete it, he appointed or those appointed being therefore in the last place on [the] said list. If the Substitutes[,] without resigning their appointments as such, excuse themselves successively from participating to fill [a] specific absence, temporary or absolute, it will proceed as in the case of an incidental absence. Article 120 Attributions of the Federal and Cassation Court are: 1. To take cognizance of the accusations against the President of the Republic or [the person] taking his place; against the Ministers of the Office, [the] Procurator General of the Nation, [the] Governor of the Federal District and against its own Members, in the cases in which such functionaries incur in penal responsibility in accordance with this Constitution and the Laws; 2. To take cognizance of the accusations against the Presidents of the States and other high functionaries of them, that the Laws of these indicate, applying, as it should proceed, the Laws of the own States or the general [Laws] of the Nation; 3. To take cognizance of the civil or criminal causes formed against the diplomatic employees in the cases permitted by the Public Law of Nations; 4. To take cognizance of the penal causes that by poor performance of their functions are formed against the Diplomatic Agents of the Republic closely accredited to other Governments; 5. To take cognizance of the recourse of cassation and of the others of which [the] decision is attributed to it by the Law, in the form and [in the] terms determined by it; 6. To take cognizance of the causes of inmates  ; 7. To resolve the controversies of any nature that arise between the functionaries of the public order of the different States; between one or more States and those of the Union and the Federal District, and between the Tribunals and the national functionaries, in matters of the competence of the Court; 8. To resolve the [matters of] competence that arise between the employees or functionaries of the judicial order of different   States; among these with the federals, and between those of one same State or the Federal District, as long as an authority called to resolve them does not exist in them; 9. To declare the nullity of the national Laws or [Laws] of the States [which] conflict   with the Constitution of the Republic. The nullity will be limited to the paragraph, Article or Articles in which the conflict appears, except when these are of such importance, by their connection to the rest, that, in the judgment of the Court, the nullity would include the entire Law; 10. To declare which is the Law that must prevail when the national [laws] among themselves are found in conflict, or these with those of the States; and declare as - 29 - well which are the Article or the Articles of a Law that must govern when conflict between provisions in them exists; 11. To declare the nullity of the acts of the Legislative Chambers or of the Federal Executive which violate the rights guaranteed to the States, or that attack their autonomy; and of the acts of the Legislative Assemblies or of the Municipal Councils which violate the restrictions expressed in paragraph 3, number 4 of Article 17 and in the number 3 of Article 18; 12. To declare the nullity of the Decrees or regulations dictated by the Executive Power for the execution of the Laws, when they alter their spirit, reason or purpose, and in general, to declare, when it proceeds, the nullity of all of the acts referred to by Articles 42 and 43 of this Constitution, as long as they emanate from a national authority or of the Federal District, or from the high functionaries of the States. When the act [that is] struck   with nullity should be a Ministerial Resolution relative to the execution, interpretation or caducity of any contract celebrated by the Federal Executive, the Court will not be able to decide except by the procedure established in the following number; 13. To take cognizance in contentious trial of all of the questions concerning nullity, caducity, resolution, scope, interpretation, compliance and any other that would arise between the Nation and the contractors or concessionaries, as a consequence of the contracts celebrated by the Federal Executive, or of [the] mining concessions or [concession] of vacant lands that it should have granted; as well as also of the controversies that should result due to its denial   to issue titles of concession when the claimants   allege that they have right to obtain them; except [for] the points that the Law in effect at the time of the celebration of the contract, of the granting of the concession or of the denial to concede it, as they case may be, would leave the decision of the Federal Executive without judicial recourse; 14. To declare, except for what is provided for by the public treaties, the executory force of the decisions   of foreign authorities, with subjection to the conditions that the Law establishes; 15. To take cognizance in contentious trial and in the cases determined by the Law, of the claims for damages and prejudices that should be initiated   against the Nation, and of all of the other actions for sums of money initiated   against it; 16. To resolve the controversies concerning boundaries referred to by Article 11; 17. To designate[,] on 19 of April of the year in which every federal constitutional period commences[,] the Member of the same Court who will be  of the Executive Power in the tenor of Article 103. This designation can so fall to one of the Members that on the expressed date should compose the Court as well as on any of the Substitutes of it. If the designated [person] should be [a] Principal Member, he will be separated from the Court when assuming the Executive Power. The designated [person] will remain in exercise of such Power until the taking of possession of the President of the Republic elected by the Congress, even if in the interval the Court should be renewed; 18. The others specified by this Constitution and the Laws in matters of federal competence. Article 121 In the cases provided for in the numbers 1 and 2 of the prior Article[,] the Court will declare summarily if there is or [is] not place for the formation of a cause in - 30 - consideration of   the protections   produced or those to be carried out  . If declaring the first[,] the functionary accused will remain of fact in suspense from the exercise of his office while the process lasts. If [declaring] the second, the entire process will cease. When the offence should be common[,] the process will pass to the competent ordinary Tribunal; and when being of political nature the Court will continue taking cognizance of it until definitive sentence. Article 122 The Federal and Cassation Court will present each year to the National Congress a Report   concerning   its work, in which it will indicate also the legal reforms that in its judgment would be appropriate to introduce. Ninth Title Of the Constitutional Reforms Article 123 This Constitution is susceptible to total or partial reforms, but neither one nor the other will be declared except by the National Congress, in its ordinary sessions, and when so solicited by the three-fourths part of the Legislative Assemblies of the States meeting in ordinary sessions. There will be no amendments or additions made except on the points on which the majority of the States should be coincident. Article 124 The constitutional amendments and additions will be made by the same system established to sanction the Laws. Article 125 When the amendment or addition has been agreed to by the National Congress, its President will submit it to the Legislative Assemblies for the definitive ratification. Article 126 The Congress can also take the initiative [concerning] the amendments or additions and agree to them by the procedure indicated in the two prior Articles, which will be considered sanctioned when being ratified by the two-thirds part of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. Article 127 Whether it is the Legislative Assemblies of the States or the Legislative Chambers of that initiate the reforms, the definitive vote of the States will return to [the] Congress, which is the one charged   to scrutinize it  . Transitory Provisions Article 128 In what concerns to Executive Power the national constitutional term   which commenced on 19 of April of 1922 will keep running and, in consequence, the current President of the Republic will continue in his office for what is left of the same term. The Senators and Deputies to the Congress will retain their mandate for the rest of the term of three years for which they were elected. With respect to the Federal and Cassation Court, after the entrance into effect of this Constitution[,] the Congress will elect the seven Principal Members and the seven Substitutes who must compose it. The Court so appointed will remain until the election foreseen in Article 119 is made in the next constitutional period. - 31 - Article 129 The current Constitutions of the States will remain in effect while they do not abrogate   them. Final Provisions Article 130 This Constitution will be promulgated, with the execution of the President of the Republic, as soon as, when the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States being scrutinized by the National Congress, it is found that they have ratified it. It will enter into force on the day of its publication in the Gaceta Oficial. Article 131 The Constitution dictated on twenty-fourth of June of nineteen twenty-five and mandated to be complied with by the President of the Republic and published in the  on the first of July of the same year[,] is abrogated. Given in the Federal Legislative Palace, in Caracas, on the twenty-second day of the month of May of nineteen twenty-eight. Year 119 of Independence and 70 of the Federation. 