CONSTITUTION of the United States of Venezuela.-
 Caracas, August 5, 1909.
 THE Congress of the United States of Venezuela, in the name
 of Almighty God, with the authority of the people of Venezuela
 and in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by Article 13
 of the Constitution, decrees the following Constitution
 CIHAPTEI I.
 Section 1.-The Nation and its Territory.
 ART. 1. The Venezuelan nation is the reunion of all Venezuelans under the same pact of political association for their
 common advantage.
 2. The Venezuelan nation is for always and irrevocably free
 and independent of every foreign Power or Dominion; and in no
 case and by no act shall any authority, Congress, or Power be
 able to change the form of government, which is and shall
 always be republican, federal, democratic, elective, representative, alternative, and responsible.
 3. The territory of Venezuela includes all that which before
 the political transformation of 1810 was called the Captaincy-
 General of Venezuela, with the modifications resulting from
 public Treaties. For its better administration it is divided into
 States, sections, districts, municipalities, and Federal territories.
 4. The sections of Apure, Aragua, Barcelona, Barinas, Barquisimeto, Carabobo, Caracas, Cojedes, Coro, Cumand, Guirico,
 Guayana, Maracaibo, Maturin, Margarita, Marida, Portugueza,
 Tichira, Trujillo, and Yaracuy, which formed the Pact of Union
 of 1864, shall resume their sovereignty and be united to form
 the United States of Venezuela, under the denomination and
 with the modifications expressed in the following paragraphs:-
 State of Apure, formed by the old State of Apure.
 State of Aragua, formed by the old State of Aragua.
 State of Anzoitegui, formed by the old State of Barcelona.
 State of Bolivar, formed by the old State of Guayana, without
 the territories of Amazonas and Delta Amacure.
 State of Carabobo, formed by the old State of Carabobo.
 State of Cojedes, formed by the old State of Cojedes.
 State of Falc6n, formed by the old State of Coro.
 State of Guirico, formed by the old State of Guirico.
 State of Lara, formed by the old State of Barquisimeto.
 State of Monagas, formed by the old State of Maturin.
 State of Marida, formed by the old State of Merida, with the
 parish of Independencia.
 State of Miranda, formed by the old State of Caricas, without the district of Vargas, to-day the department of a federal
 district.
 State of Nueva Esparta, formed by the old State of Margarita.
 State of Portugueza, formed by the old State of Portugueza.
 State of Sucre, formed by the old State of Cumani.
 State of TAchira, formed by the old State of Tichira.
 State of Trujillo, formed by the old State of Trujillo.
 State of Yaracuy, formed by the old State of Yaracuy.
 State of Zamora. formed by the old State of Barinas.
 State of Zulia, formed by the old State of Maracaibo, with-
 out the parish of Independencia.
 5. The limits of these States are determined by those laid
 down for the old provinces in the law of the 28th April, 1856,
 which defined the last territorial division.
 Pending controversies and any others which may exist
 between States with regard to their general limits shall be
 decided by the tribunal dealt with in Article 144" of this Constitution.
 6. Two or more of the political entities mentioned in Article 4t
 reserve to themselves the right of uniting to form a single State,
 but they shall always preserve the right of regaining their
 character as a State.  In either case the national Executive,
 Congress, and the other States of the Union shall be informed.
 7. The States making use of the power conferred on them in
 the previous Article shall preserve the rights laid down in
 Articles 88+ and 109� of this Constitution for the election of
 members of the Council of State and of the Federal Court of
 Cassation.
 8. The States are equal among themselves, and the Constitutions that may be fixed for their internal organization must be
 in harmony with the federal principles established in the present
 pact.
 9. The federal territories of Amazonas and Delta Amacuro,
 which shall be organized by special law, can opt for the
 category of States, provided always they fulfil the, following
 conditions:-
 (1.) That they have at least the population required for the
 election of a deputy, in conformity with this Constitution.
 (2.) That they prove before Congress that they are capable
 of attending to the public service in all its branches, and of
 meeting the expenses involved.
 10. The federal district, which shall be organized by a special
 law, shall consist of the town of Caricas, together with the
 neighbouring parishes: El Recreo, El Valle, La Vega. Antimano,
 Macarao, Macuto, and the department of Vargas.
 The seat of the general authorities (- poderes generales") of
 the nation is the town of Caricas; but the executive power can
 * Page 912.  t Page 886.  1 Page 904.   � Page 907.
 
  887 
 
 
 888
 
 
 
 fix its temporary residence in any part of the Federal District,
 whenever unforeseen-circumstances require it.
 11. The territory of the nation cannot be alienated, nor
 leased, nor ceded in any way to a foreign Power.
 CHAPTER 11.
 Section 2.-Of the Bases of the Union.
 12. The States which form the Venezuelan Union are autonomous and equal in political status; they preserve to the full
 the sovereignty not delegated in this Constitution, and they are
 obliged
 (1.) To organize themselves in conformity with the principles
 of popular, elective, federal, representative, alternative, and
 responsible government, and, in order to establish rules for their
 management and internal government to elaborate their Constitutions in conformity with the principles of this fundamental pact.
 (2.) To fulfil and cause to be fulfilled and executed the
 Constitution and the laws of the Union, and the Decrees, Orders,
 and resolutions which the national authorities may send them in
 the exercise of their legal attributions and powers.
 (3.) To recognize in their respective Constitutions the municipal autonomy of the districts and their independence of the
 political power of the State, in all that concerns their economic
 and administrative rule; and, in consequence, the districts shall
 be able to establish their own financial system, subjecting it to
 the dispositions laid down in clauses 10, 11, 12, and 13 of this
 Article.  In case of internal or external war, the executive
 powers of the State shall assume the economic and financial
 administration of the districts under its jurisdiction, with the
 consent of their Legislative Assembly, and if this body should
 not be assembled, with that of the Supreme Court.
 (4.) To defend themselves against all violence harmful to
 their independence or the integrity of the nation.
 (5.) Not to alienate any part of their territory to a foreign
 Power, nor to ask for its protection, nor to establish nor cultivate
 political nor diplomatic relations with other nations.
 (6.) Not to associate nor ally themselves with another nation,
 nor to separate from Venezuela.
 (7.) To cede to the 6overnment of the Federation the territory necessary for the erection of forts, wharves, storehouses,
 docks, penitentiaries, and other works indispensable for the
 general administration.
 (8.) To allow the Government of the Union the free administration of the territories of Amazonas and Delta Amacure,
 which shall have the option of entering the category of States
 when they fulfil the conditions laid down in Article 9' of this
 Constitution.
 
 (9.) To reserve to the federal power all legislative and
 executive jurisdiction over the maritime, coastal, and river
 navigation, as well as over tie wharfs and national roads,
 without the power to restrict by taxes or privileges, the
 navigation of the rivers and other navigable waterways on
 which special works have not been rendered necessary.
 National roads are those which cross from the limits of one
 State to another or to the federal district or federal territories.
 (10.) Not to impose taxes on products destined for exportation.
 (11.) Not to establish taxes on foreign goods burdened with
 national duties or exempt from such charge by law, nor on
 cattle, products, effects, or any other class of goods before they
 are offered for consumption.
 (12.) Not to prohibit the consumption of cattle, articles, and
 products of other States, nor their transit, nor to burden their
 consumption with taxes greater or less than those paid by
 similar articles of local production.
 (13.) Not to establish custom-houses for the collection of
 duties, as those shall be national only.
 (14.) To reserve to each State the right of disposing of its
 natural products in the manner laid down in clause 27 of this
 Article.
 (15.) To give entire faith to and cause to be fulfilled and
 executed the public acts and judicial decisions of other States,
 of the federal district and of the federal territories.
 (16.) To organize its tribunals and judicature for the administration of justice, and all to have the same substantive legislation,
 civil, mercantile, and penal as also those of procedure.
 (17.) To assist in the formation of the Federal Court of
 Cassation in the manner prescribed by this Constitution.
 (18.) To submit to the decisions of the Federal Court of
 Cassation as Supreme Federal Tribunal and Supreme Tribunal
 of the States.
 (19.) To adopt the system of direct vote for the nomination
 of the Municipal Councils, Legislative Assemblies, and Chamber
 of Deputies; and for that of its other popularly elected
 functionaries the system of indirect vote or vote by delegation;
 the vote being secret in both cases, and having for basis the
 electoral census according to the federal law on the matter.
 (20.) To reserve to the nation the right to legislate for
 higher public instruction. The nation as well as the States
 must establish primary instruction, free and obligatory; that of
 arts and crafts is free.
 (21.) Not to impose duties on national officials, except in
 their character of citizens of the State, and provided their duties
 are not incompatible with the national public service.
 (22.) To give their proportional unarmed contingent for the
 formation of the national public force, in accordance with
 the law.
 (23.) Not to permit in their territory enlistments or levies
 having for their object an attack on liberty or independence, or
 
 
 the disturbance of national public order, or the order of other
 States or other nation.
 (24.) In no case to declare nor to make war, and to preserve
 strict neutrality in all disputes arising between other States.
 (25.) To refer and submit to the decisions of the Federal
 Court of Cassation as Supreme Federal Tribunal in all controversies arising between two or more States when they cannot
 by themselves and by pacific means arrive at an agreement. If
 in case of a resort to arbitration, the arbitrator to whose
 decision they appeal should for any reason not be appointed,
 the controversy shall remain de facto submitted to the Federal
 Court of Cassation.  Controversies respecting frontiers are
 excepted, and these shall be decided in conformity with the
 provisions of Article 5* and Article 144t of this Constitution.
 (26.) To acknowledge the power of the Federal Court of
 Cassation as Supreme Tribunal of the States, to take cognizance
 of cases which, by treason to the fatherland or by infraction of
 the Constitution or of the laws of the Union, are directed against
 those exercising the high executive authority of the States, and
 a provision to this effect shall be included in their Constitution.
 In such cases the procedure laid down by the general laws shall
 be followed, and they shall be decided in conformity therewith.
 (27.) To retain as their own revenue:-
 (i.) The products of the contributions collected under the
 name of territorial tax in all the custom-houses of the republic.
 (ii.) The total product of mines, waste lands, and salines.
 This revenue shall be distributed proportionately among all the
 States, according to the number of their inhabitants: but in
 doing so, the amount corresponding to the number of 35,000
 inhabitants is fixed as a minimum for a State.
 (iii.) The share of the liquor revenue which is ascribed to
 them by law, and which shall be distributed proportionately,
 according to the production and consumption of the various
 States.
 (iv.) The revenue accruing from taxes on their natural
 products.
 (v.) The revenue accruing from stamped paper in accordance
 with the laws relating thereto.
 (28.) To delegate in Congress of the Union, the power of
 creating and organizing the revenue dealt with in paragraphs 1.
 2, and 3 of the preceding clause.
 (29.) To keep away from the frontiers individuals, who for
 political reasons take refuge in a State, provided always that
 the interested State so requests, for reasons which appear just
 to the State giving asylum.
 (30.) To cede to the nation the administration of the mines,
 salines, waste lands, and that of the liquor revenue, in order
 that the first and second may be regulated by a uniform law of
 exploitation, the waste lands to be alienable in accordance with
 
 the law, and the other branch to be applied in the interests of
 the people.
 (31.) Not to coin money nor for any reason to issue paper
 money.
 CHAPTER III.-Of Nationality.
 Section 1.-Of Venezuelans.
 13. Venezuelans are such either by birth or by naturalization.
 (a.) Venezuelans by birth are-
 (1.) All persons born in the territory of Venezuela.
 (2.) The children of Venezuelan parents, whatever be their
 birthplace.
 (b.) Venezuelans by naturalization are-
 (1.) The children of a Venezuelan father or mother by
 naturalization born outside of the territory of the republic, if
 they should be domiciled in the country and manifest the desire
 to be Venezuelans.
 (2.) All persons born, or who may be born, in the Spanish-
 American republics, provided always they have fixed their
 residence in the territory of the republic and manifested their
 desire to be Venezuelans.
 (3.) All foreigners who shall have acquired letters of naturalization in conformity with the laws.
 (4.) All foreign women married to Venezuelans, during the
 matrimonial bond; but those desiring to retain that character
 after the dissolution of the bond must make the declaration
 referred to in the following Article within the first year.
 14. Declaration of the desire to become a Venezuelan must
 be made before the Principal Registrar of the jurisdiction in
 which the person making such declaration establishes his
 domicile, who, on receiving the same, shall embody it in the
 proper protocol, and shall send a copy thereof to the national
 Executive for publication in the " Official Gazette."
 15. Are electors or eligible for election, Venezuelans of more
 than 21 years of age, subject only to the conditions laid down
 in this Constitution and in the laws.
 16. All Venezuelans shall be obliged to serve the nation
 according to law.
 17. Venezuelans shall enjoy throughout the territory of the
 republic equal rights, and shall have like duties, without any
 other conditions than those laid down in this Constitution.
 18. Rights of citizenship shall be suspended-
 (1.) By undertaking to serve against Venezuela.
 (2.) By condemnation to punishment which involves prohibition or inability to discharge public offices or political rights
 during the term of said punishment.
 (3.) By receiving, while in the public service, offices, honours,
 or recompenses from foreign Governments without the previous
 authorization of the Senate.
 (4.) By judicial interdiction.

 
 . 19. The law shall determine the rights and duties of
 foreigners.
 20. Foreigners taking part in political dissensions shall be
 subject to the same responsibilities as Venezuelans, and to the
 provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 82.*
 21. In no case shall nationals or foreigners seek to make the
 nation or the States indemnify them for loss, damages, or expropriations that shall not have been occasioned by legitimate
 authorities acting in their public character.
 22. The Venezuelan Government shall not make Treaties
 with other nations to the detriment of the principles established
 in the two preceding Articles.

 Section 2.-Of the Rights of Venezuelans.
 23. The nation guarantees to Venezuelans-
 (1.) Inviolability of life; capital punishment remains
 abolished, whatever may be the law establishing it or the
 authority ordering the same.
 (2.) Property, with all its attributes, rights, and privileges
 it shall only be subject to contributions decreed by the legislative authority, to judicial decision, and to be taken for works of
 public utility, after indemnification and by virtue of a reasoned
 judgment.
 (3.) Inviolability of correspondence and other private documents, which shall not be examined except by order of competent public authority and with the formalities established by
 law, secrecy always being preserved with regard to domestic
 and private matters.
 (4.) Inviolability of the domestic hearth, which shall not be
 forcibly entered except to prevent the perpetration of a crime,
 and even this must be done in the manner established by law.
 (5.) Personal liberty, and in consequence-
 (i.) Compulsory recruiting for armed service remains abolished; such service must be rendered in accordance with the
 law;
 (ii.) Slavery remains for ever forbidden;
 (iii.) Slaves who tread the soil of Venezuela are free;
 (iv.) All persons have the right to do or execute that which
 does not prejudice another; and
 (v.) No one is obliged to do that which the law does not
 command, nor is he prevented from doing that which it does
 not prohibit.
 (vi.) Liberty of thought, expressed by word or through the
 press. In case of calumny, injury, or damage done to a third
 party, the aggrieved person shall have a right of action before
 the competent tribunals of justice in conformity with the laws;
 but the accused shall not be detained or imprisoned in any case
 except after confirmed judgment.
(vii.) Liberty to travel without passport and to change
 domicile, provided that all the legal formalities are duly observed,
 and to leave the republic and return thereto, taking and trans-
 porting their goods.
 (viii.) Liberty of industry, save in case of the prohibitions
 and limitations demanded by public order and good morals, such
 as games of hazard and chance, raffles, and lotteries, which are
 expressly prohibited. The law may grant a temporary privilege
 to inventors and to those introducing an unexploited industry
 into the country.
 (ix.) Liberty of meeting and association without arms,
 publicly or privately, without the authorities being able to
 exercise any act of coercion.
 (x.) Liberty of petition. This may be exercised before any
 functionary, authority, or corporation whatsoever, who are
 obliged to give a prompt decision. If the petition should be of
 several persons, the first five are responsible for the authenticity of the signatures and all for the truth of the facts.
 (xi.) Liberty of suffrage, without other restrictions than
 those established by this Constitution and the laws.
 (xii.) Liberty of teaching.
 (xiii.) Liberty of religion; but the right of patronage now
 exercised by the republic cannot for any reason be restricted,
 and shall continue to be exercised in the manner prescribed by
 law ; and it is likewise understood that the Federal Executive
 shall exercise supreme inspection over all worship established or
 to be established in the country.
 (xiv.) Individual security, and therefore-
 (a.) No Venezuelan shall be imprisoned or arrested for a
 debt that does not arise from fraud or crime.
 (b.) Nor be judged by special tribunals or commissions, but
 only by his regular Judges, and in virtue of pre-existing law.
 (c.) Nor be imprisoned or detained except after a summary
 decision that a punishable offence has been committed and on
 the written warrant of the functionary ordering the arrest,
 with a statement of the motive thereof, unless he be taken
 in the act.
 (d.) Nor be deprived of the right of communication with his
 fellow-citizens for any reason or pretext.
 (e.) Nor be obliged to take oath nor undergo interrogation
 in a criminal cause against himself, or against his relatives
 within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second of
 affinity, nor against his consort.
 (f.) Nor to continue in prison if the cause of the imprisonment be removed.
 (g.) Nor be condemned to suffer imprisonment in a criminal
 matter unless after being legally summoned and heard.
 (h.) Nor be condemned to personal punishment for more
 than fifteen years.
 (i.) Nor be judged a second time for the same offence;
 and, furthermore, are hereby abolished all infamous punishments, such as those known by the names of "grillos" (grid-
 iron), " cepos " (stocks), " esposas " (manacles), &c., whatever
 be the law establishing them.
 (xv.) Equality, in virtue whereof-
 (a.) All must be judged by the same laws, and subjected to
 like duties, services, and contributions.
 (b.) No titles of nobility, hereditary honours and distinctions, nor employments and offices whose salaries or emoluments last longer than the period of service shall be granted.
 (c.) No other official style shall be given to employ6s save
 that of " citizen " and " you " (" usted ").
 24. The preceding list does not limit the power of the States
 to grant to their inhabitants other rights.
 25. The preceding enumeration of rights must not be under-
 stood as a negation of any other rights that may belong to
 citizens and which are not included in this chapter.
 26. All persons who should issue, sign, execute or order to
 be executed, decrees, orders, or resolutions that violate any of
 the rights granted to Venezuelans are culpable, and should be
 punished according to law. The guilty person should indemnify
 the injured for the damages which he may occasion him.
 27. The rights recognized and consecrated in the preceding
 Articles shall not suffer detriment or damage by the laws which
 regulate their exercise, and those that do so shall, in conformity
 with the tenth paragraph of Article 112,* be declared unconstitutional and be without effect.
 CHAPTER IV.-Of the National Sovereignty and the Public Power.
 28. The sovereignty resides essentially in the people, who
 exercise it through the public powers.
 29. The definition of attributions and faculties lays down the
 limits of the public power; whatever goes beyond the limits of
 this definition constitutes a usurpation of attributions.
 80. All usurped authority is ineffective and its acts are void.
 31. All decisions accorded by direct or indirect requisition
 of force, or of a popular meeting with subversive intent, are
 void in law and without effect.
 32. The exercise of the public power involves personal
 responsibility for exceeding the limits of the powers granted
 by the Constitution, or for the infringement of the law which
 defines its functions in the terms established by this Constitution.
 33. The public power is distributed between the federal
 power and the power of the States, according to the limits
 established in this Constitution.
 34. The federal power is divided into legislative, executive,
 and judicial.
 

 CHAPTER V.-Of the Legislative Power.
 Section I .-Of the Leqislative Power.
 35. Legislative power is exercised by an assembly entitled
 Congress of the United States of Venezuela," and composed of
 two Chambers, one of senators and the other of deputies.
 Section 2.-Of the Chamber of Deputies.
 36. To form the Chamber of Deputies each State shall elect
 by direct vote, in conformity with the election law, one for
 every 35,000 inhabitants and one more for an excess of 15,000.
 The State whose population does not reach 35,000 inhabitants
 shall elect one deputy. An equal number of substitutes shall be
 elected in the same manner as the principals, to replace them as
 vacancies occur, in the order of their election. The deputies
 shall remain in office for four years and shall be renewed as a
 whole.
 37. In order to be a deputy it is necessary to be a Venezuelan
 by birth and to have completed 21 years of age.
 38. The federal district and the federal territories who
 possess, or shall possess, the basis of population established by
 Article 36 shall also elect deputies by direct vote and with the
 formalities established by law. In the basis of population the
 natives who live in a state of savagery shall not be computed.
 39. The attributes of the Chamber of Deputies are:-
 (1.) To elect every two years, within the first fifteen days of
 meeting, the Procureur-General of the nation and two substitutes by an absolute majority of votes and successive scrutinies,
 who shall take the legal oath before the Federal Court of
 Cassation in order to enter upon the exercise of their duties,
 which shall be determined by law;
 (2.) To pass votes of censure on the Ministers of State, who
 shall, ipso facto, be suspended from office; and
 (3.) Such others as the laws prescribe.
 Section 3.-Of the Chamber of Senate.
 40. To form this Chamber, the Legislative Assembly of each
 State shall elect, outside of their number, two principal senators,
 and two substitutes to supply the absence of the former, in
 order of their election. The senators shall remain in oflice four
 years.
 41. To be a senator it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by
 birth and to have completed 30 years of age.
 42. The attributions of the Chamber of the Senate are
 (1.) To grant to illustrious Venezuelans, twenty-five years
 after death, the honour of having their remains deposited in the
 national Pantheon.
 
 
 (2.) To give or withhold their consent to the acceptance by
 national officials of gifts, offices, honours, and rewards from
 foreign nations.
 (3.) Such others as the laws prescribe.
 Section 4.-Of the Provisions common to both Chambers.
 43. The Legislative Chambers shall meet every year in the
 capital of the Union on the 19th April, or as near thereto as
 possible, without the necessity of being previously convoked.
 The sessions shall last seventy days and are incapable of proro-
 gation.
 44. The Chambers shall open their sessions with at least
 two-thirds of their members, and, in default of this number,
 those who attend shall meet as a preparatory commission, and
 shall take such measures as to them seem expedient for the
 attendance of the absentees.
 45. The sessions, once opened, may continue with the attend-
 ance of an absolute majority of the whole number of members.
 46. The Chambers shall work separately, and shall meet in
 congress when so determined by the Constitution or laws, or
 when one of the Chambers considers it necessary. If the
 Chamber invited agrees it shall fix the day and hour of the
 meeting.
 47. The sessions shall be public, but may be secret when
 the Chamber so decides.
 48. The Chambers have the right-
 (1.) To establish their respective rules and regulations and
 rules of debate, and to lay down means of correction for those
 who infringe them;
 (2.) To place police in the building where they hold their
 sessions;
 (3.) To correct or punish disorderly spectators;
 (4.) To remove the obstacles that are opposed to the free
 exercise of their functions;
 (5.) To order their special resolutions to be executed ; and
 (6.) To confirm their members and receive their resignations.
 49. The Chambers shall sit in the same town and shall open
 and close their sessions on the same day, and neither of the
 two may suspend them nor remove the residence without the
 consent of the other. In case of difference they shall meet in
 Congress and execute the decision come to.
 50. The exercise of any public office whatsoever is incompatible during the sessions with that of senator or deputy. The
 law shall fix the emoluments to be received by the members of
 Congress for their services, and these can only be augmented
 for the following period
 51. The senators and deputies, from thirty days before the
 19th April until thirty days after the termination of the sessions,
 shall enjoy an immunity, which shall consist in the suspension of
 

 
 all civil or criminal proceedings, whatever be their origin or
 nature. When any one commits an act which deserves personal
 imprisonment the investigation shall continue until the end of
 the first inquiry, and shall remain at that stage while the
 immunity lasts.
 52. Neither Chamber may, in any case whatsoever, consent
 to the violation of the immunity of any of its members as
 established in the preceding Article. Magistrates, authorities,
 or corporations, and their agents, who deprive a senator or
 deputy of his liberty during the enjoyment of his immunity
 shall be brought to trial before the competent judicial authority,
 and may be accused by any citizen whatever for this purpose,
 and are, ipso facto, deprived of their posts, without prejudice to
 the penalties established by law against persons who infringe
 the Constitution.
 53. Congress shall be presided over by the President of the
 Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be
 Vice-President.
 54. The members of the Chambers shall not be responsible
 for votes nor opinions expressed therein.
 55. The senators and deputies cannot make contracts with
 the National Executive, either for themselves or for others, nor
 advocate before it the claims of others.
 56. When, in consequence of death or any other cause
 creating a permanent vacancy, the number of substitutes of a
 State in the Senate shall have been exhausted or reduced to
 a number less than that to which it is entitled, the legislative
 assembly concerned shall fill the vacancy or vacancies which
 have occurred for the period that remained to the substitute or
 substitutes.  As to vacancies occurring in the Chamber of
 Deputies, the constitution of the States shall determine the
 manner of filling them.
 Section 5.-Of the Attributions of Congress.
 57. The Congress of the United States of Venezuela shall
 have the following attributions
 (I.) To take cognizance of the resignations of the President
 of the Republic and of Councillors of State.
 (2.) To examine the annual Message which the President of
 the United States of Venezuela is required to present.
 (3.) To examine, approve, or disapprove the account that
 the Ministers of State are required to present, in conformity
 with Article 103* of this Constitution.
 (4.) To pass the organic and electoral laws of the federal
 district and federal territories. In the federal district the law
 shall assure the autonomy of the municipality in economic and
 administrative matters, and shall determine the manner of
 exercising its attributions, in conformity with the precepts of
 

 this Constitution, in such a way as not to hamper the political
 liberty of action of the high federal powers that reside therein.
 In case of war the chief civil and political authority shall assume
 the administration of the two branches mentioned.
 (5.) To raise to the rank of States of the Union federal
 territories that ask it, providing always that they comply with
 the conditions prescribed in Article 9* of this Constitution.
 (6.) To decree the national taxes.
 (7.) To sanction the national Codes, in accordance with
 basis (16) of Article 12t of this Constitution, and the Codes of
 Federal Public Instruction, Finance, and the Military and
 Maritime Code, and the laws pertaining to the organization of
 the national militia.
 (8.) To fix the type, value, alloy, weight, and coinage of the
 national money, gold being the monetary standard    and to
 determine upon the admission and circulation of foreign money.
 (9.) To create, suppress, and fix the salaries of national
 officials.
 (10.) To determine upon all that relates to the National Debt
 and the interest thereon.
 (11.) To decree loans secured on the credit of the nation.
 (12.) To decree all that relates to statistics, sanitation,
 and the national census, which shall be taken every ten
 years.
 (13.) To approve or reject Treaties and diplomatic Conventions, which in the absence of their approbation shall not be
 valid, and can neither be ratified nor exchanged. The approving
 law, passed by Congress, shall not receive its exequatur until
 it is known that the Treaty is accepted by the other party.
 Treaties shall not be published until they have been ratified and
 exchanged.
 (14.) To approve or disapprove contracts of national interest
 made by the federal executive, which, without this requisite,
 shall not be put into execution.
 (15.) To sanction the budget of public revenue and expenditure.
 (16.) To dictate the laws relating to the exercise of the
 attributions which this Constitution confers on the federal power,
 and besides all those of a general character which may be
 necessary.
 (17.) To fix and make uniform the national weights and
 measures.
 (18.) To elect the President of the United States of Venezuela
 from its own number, or outside thereof.
 (19.) To elect the Council of State established by this
 Constitution, and to convoke the citizens that may be elected
 thereto.
 (20.) To elect the Federal Court of Cassation, in conformity
 with Articles 108, 109. 110, and 1111 of this Constitution.
 
 (21.) To establish the special administrative rule applicable
 to the federal territories.
 (22.) To establish the increase that may be necessary in the
 basis of the population for the election of deputies.
 (23.) To permit or prohibit the admission of foreigners to
 the service of the republic.
 (24.) To dictate the laws upon military pensions and pensions
 for soldiers' families.
 (25.) To determine the manner of conferring military rank
 and promotion, and to confer them from lieutenant-colonel
 upwards.
 (26.) To fix yearly the number of the land and sea forces, and
 dictate army ordinances.
 (27.) To dictate the law for the formation and replacement
 of the forces expressed in the preceding paragraph.
 (28.) To decree war, and call upon the national executive to
 negotiate peace.
 58. The Acts sanctioned by the Legislative Chambers of
 Venezuela working separately as co-legislative bodies, shall be
 called " laws"; those sanctioned by them when united in Congress, or, when separate, for the private matters of each, shall
 be called " resolutions."
 Section G.-Of the Making of Laws.
 59. Laws may be initiated in either Chamber, and their
 respective members have the right so to initiate legislation.
 When it is a question of laws such as civil, penal, and
 commercial codes, the codes of procedure and finance, the
 military, instruction or mining codes, the initiative pertains in
 like manner to the Minister of the Department concerned; but
 in this case the bill shall be published in the press before being
 presented in either Chamber by the Minister concerned.
 60. As soon as a Bill has been presented it shall be read
 and considered in order to be introduced; and if this is agreed
 to, it shall be given three discussions at intervals of at least one
 day, the established rule of debate being observed.
 1. Bills approved in the Chamber in which they were
 introduced shall be passed on to the other, for the purposes of
 the preceding Article; and if they should not be rejected, they
 shall be returned to the Chamber in which they originated, with
 the alterations, if any, made therein.
 62. If the Chamber in which the Bill was introduced should
 not accept the alterations, it may insist on its view, and may
 send its reasons in writing to the other Chamber. It may also
 invite the other Chamber to meet in Congress and resolve both
 Chambers into a general commission for seeking the manner of
 coming to an agreement; but if this cannot be arrived at, the
 Bill shall remain without effect, in case the Chamber in which
 it originated should, sitting alone, decide to insist on its amendments.
 
 
 
 63. When Bills are sent from one Chamber to another, the
 days on which they have been discussed shall be stated.
 64. Bills rejected in the session of one year, shall not be
 presented again until the next session.
 65. Bills that remain pending in one Chamber at the end of
 the session shall undergo therein the same three discussions in
 the session of the following year.
 66. In laws, the formulas to be used shall be as follows:
 " The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees":
 67. A law that amends another shall be drawn as a whole,
 and the former shall be repealed in its entirety.
 68. Laws shall be repealed with the same formalities as
 those laid down for passing them.
 69. Legislative Acts once sanctioned shall be communicated
 in duplicate to the President of the Republic, and shall be
 published in the " Diario de Debates " of the Senate, and shall
 be put into force as soon as the formalities established in
 paragraph 8 of Article 80' of this Constitution have been fulfilled,
 The President of the Republic shall return one of the two copies
 to Congress with the order sanctioning them, through the
 Minister who countersigns them.
 In the publication to be made in the " Diario de Debates"
 shall appear the date on which the laws or decrees have been
 laid before the President of the Republic, in order that after the
 lapse of the fifteen days referred to in the said paragraph 8,
 Article 80,* they may have full force and effect.
 70. The power of legislation possessed by Congress cannot
 be delegated.
 71. No legislative disposition shall have a retroactive effect,
 except in matters of judicial procedure and in case of reduction
 of punishment.
 72. When the Ministers of State have pleaded in the
 Chambers the unconstitutional nature of a Bill, and it shall
 nevertheless become law, the Procureur-General shall make a
 statement of the conflict in order that the point may be settled
 in conformity with paragraph 10 of Article 112.t
 CHAPTER VI.-Of the Federal -Executive Power.
 Section 1.-Of the General Administration of the Union.
 73. Every function relative to the general administration of
 the Union that is not attributed to any other authority by this
 Constitution, appertains to the national executive, and shall be
 exercised by a Magistrate, who shall be called " President of the
 United States of Venezuela," in union with the Ministers of
 State, who are his instruments, and the Council of State in all
 the attributions conferred on it by the Constitution.
 74. The functions of the national executive shall not be
 
 exercised outside of the federal district, except in the cases
 provided by this Constitution.
 Section 2.-Of the Election of the President of the United States
 of Venezuela.
 75. The Legislative Chambers shall meet in Congress within
 the first fifteen days after their installation to verify the election
 of the President of the United States of Venezuela.
 76. The session of Congress at which the election of the
 President of the United States of Venezuela takes place shall be
 public and permanent, and shall be made known five days
 beforehand by publication in the press.
 77. Voting shall be secret, and the citizen who obtains the
 absolute majority of votes of the members of Congress taking
 part in the election shall be proclaimed elected President of the
 United States of Venezuela.
 Section 3.-Of the President of the United States of Venezuela.
 78. The President of the United States of Venezuela, shall
 be a Venezuelan by birth, more than 30 years of age, in possession
 of his civil and political rights and a layman; and shall make
 the legal promise before Congress previous to entering upon his
 functions.
 79. During the temporary or permanent absence of the
 President of the United States of Venezuela, his place shall be.
 filled by the member who is at the time President of the Council
 of State. The oath mentioned in the preceding Article, in case
 of the permanent absence of the President of the Union, shall be
 taken by the member of Council concerned before that body, and
 the Federal Court of Cassation assembled in solemn session, and
 presided over by the member who has been called in his turn to
 act as President of the Council.
 But in case a permanent vacancy should occur in the presidency of the Republic within the first two years of a constitu-
 tional period, the councillor in charge of the presidency of the
 United States of Venezuela shall convoke the Congress to elect
 a citizen to discharge the duties of the presidency for the
 remainder of the period.
 80. The attributions of the President of the United States of
 Venezuela are:-
 (I.) To name and remove the Ministers of State.
 (2.) To receive and compliment the public Ministers of other
 nations.
 (3.) To sign official notes directed to the Heads of the
 States.
 (4.) To administer the federal district according to law, and
 to act therein as first civil and political authority.
 (5.) To administer the federal territories in conformity with
 their organic laws.
 
  901 
 
 901
 
 
 
 
 (6.) To direct warlike operations and command the army in
 person, or appoint someone to do so.
 (7.) To leave the capital of the Republic for a time when
 required to do so by affairs of public interest, and lie may also
 abandon the exercise of his office temporarily, first calling upon
 the person who should replace him, in conformity with this
 Constitution, and on the cessation of the cause of his absence,
 resume office, and for this purpose it shall be sufficient that lie
 communicate the fact to the person discharging the office of the
 first Magistrate.
 (8.) To order the execution and watch over the fulfillment and
 execution of this Constitution, and of the laws and decrees of the
 national Congress, and cause them to be published in the " Official
 Gazette " within the first fifteen days of receiving them, saving
 the provisions laid down in paragraph 13 of Article 57.*
 (9.) To issue decrees and regulations for the better execution
 of the laws, providing always that the law demands or establishes
 the same in its text, taking care that the spirit and object of the
 law is not altered.
 (10.) To organize the army and national militia in conformity
 with the law.
 (11.) To preserve the nation from external attacks.
 (12.) To negotiate the loans decreed by Congress in entire
 conformity with its dispositions.
 (13.) To. watch over and supervise the collection of the
 national revenue.
 (14.) To regulate the service of posts, telegraphs, and federal
 telephones, with the power to create or suppress stations or
 offices when urgently necessary, rendering account to Congress
 at its next meeting.
 (15.) To dictate the necessary measures for taking the census
 of the republic every ten years.
 (16.) To grant navigation licences to national ships.
 (17.) To grant letters of naturalization in conformity with
 the law.
 (18.) To prohibit the entrance to the territory of the republic
 of foreigners specially dedicated to the service of any worship
 or religion, whatsoever be the order or hierarchical rank with
 which they are invested. Nevertheless, the Government may
 sanction the entry of missionaries, who shall establish them-
 selves in such parts of the republic where there are aborigines
 to be civilized.
 (19.) To name the national employees whose appointment is
 not attributed to any other functionary.
 (20.) To remove employees at will, and order their suspension
 or trial if there be reason for so doing.
 (21.) To perform the other functions attributed to him by
 law.
 81. Besides the above attributions, which are peculiar to the
 * Page 898.
 
  902 
 
 902
 
 
 
 
 President of the United States of Venezuela, he shall, with the
 consultative vote of the Council of State, exercise the following
 functions:-
 (1.) To convoke an extraordinary meeting of Congress when
 some serious matter demands it.
 (2.) To declare war in the name of the republic when
 Congress has decreed it.
 (3.) To order the Procureur-General of the nation to demand
 the nullity of any Act which violates the basis of the Union,
 and to set in motion the necessary judicial proceedings.
 (4.) To administer the Government waste lands, mines,
 salines, and the revenue from alcohol in conformity with the
 law.
 (5.) To direct diplomatic negotiations, and to make all kinds
 of Treaties with other nations through the diplomatic agents of
 the republic, submitting those Treaties to the national Congress
 in accordance with paragraph 13 of Article 57.*
 (6.) To make contracts of national interest in conformity
 with the laws.
 (7.) To prohibit, when he thinks desirable, the immigration
 of foreigners into national territory, or to expel from it foreigners
 who have no domicile established in the country.
 82. Besides the foregoing attributions the President of the
 Union shall, with the deliberative vote of the Council of State,
 exercise the following functions:-
 (1.) In case of foreign war or of internal upheaval, or of
 armed rebellion against existing institutions, lie shall, after
 declaring that public order is disturbed and until the re-establishment of peace, make use of the following prerogatives
 (a.) To demand from the States the help necessary for the
 defence of the nation or of its institutions;
 (b.) To demand contributions in advance;
 (c.) To arrest, imprison, or expel from the territory of the
 republic persons, natives, or foreigners who may be opposed to
 the re-establishment of peace;
 (d.) To suspend, in case of international war, those rights
 exercise of which may be incompatible with the defence of the
 country, except that of the inviolability of life; in cases of
 internal war lie may make use of the same prerogatives, but
 only until peace is re-established;
 (e.) To appoint the place to which the general power of the
 Union shall be removed provisionally when there are grave
 reasons for it;
 (f.) To decree the trial for treason against the country of
 those Venezuelans who may be in any way hostile to the
 national defence; and
 (g.) To issue letters of marque and authorize reprisals.
 (2.) To use the public forces, in case friendly intervention
 should be insufficient, to put an end to an armed collision

 between two or more States, and require them to lay down
 their arms and submit the decision of their controversy to the
 dispositions in paragraph (25), Article 12,* of this Constitution.
 He shall also exercise this prerogative in case of armed rebellion
 in any of the States of the Union, after having exhausted all
 pacific and conciliatory measures for establishing peace and
 public order.
 (3.) To grant amnesties and pardons.
 83. The President of the Union shall be obliged to present
 to Congress, personally or by one of his Ministers, within the
 first ten days of the ordinary sessions, a synthetic measure in
 which lie shall give account of his administrative and political
 acts, report regarding the state of the republic, and indicate
 the improvements which it would be advantageous to adopt in
 the existing legislation.
 84. The President of the Republic, although lie shall not
 have discharged the whole constitutional period corresponding
 to the four years for which he was appointed, shall not be
 elected for the following period. The following are ineligible
 for election as President for the immediately following period:
 the citizen who has discharged the office of President during
 the last year of the four which constituted the previous period,
 and the relations of one or the other to the fourth civil degree
 of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, both inclusive.
 85. The law shall fix the salary to be received by the President of the Republic or of the person who acts in his stead, and
 the amount so fixed shall not be augmented except for the
 following constitutional period.
 86. The President of the Republic shall cease to exercise his
 functions on the 19th April, when the constitutional period
 terminates; and on the same day the President of the Federal
 Court of Cassation shall take charge of the executive power
 until such time as the newly elected President assumes possession.
 87. The President of the United States of Venezuela, or lie
 who acts for him, is liable for treason to the country and for
 offences at common law.
 Section 4.-Of the Council of State.
 88. There shall be a Council of State, composed of ten
 members, appointed by Congress every four years in the same
 session as that in which the President of the United States of
 Venezuela is elected; and immediately after this election it
 shall be formed of one representative from among the members
 of Congress or outside it for each of the groups referred to in
 the subjoined paragraph of this Article. Then shall also be
 elected in the same manner substitutes, who shall fill the temporary or permanent vacancies of their respective principals in the
 order of election.
 
 For the election of the Council of State the States shall be
 grouped in the following form:- .
 First group: States of Aragua and Miranda.
 Second group: States of Carabobo and Guirico.
 Third group: States of Portugueza and Cojedes.
 Fourth group: States of Lara and Yaracuy.
 Fifth group: States of Zernora and Trujillo.
 Sixth group: States of Tichira and Mdrida.
 Seventh group: States of Falc6n and Zulia.
 Eighth group: States of Anzoategui and Monagas.
 Ninth group: States of Sucre and Nueva Esparta.
 Tenth group: States of Apure and Bolivar.
 89. On the day following the election, or as soon thereafter
 as possible, the above-named Council of State shall proceed to
 its constitutional installation, electing for that purpose its officers
 for the first year, who shall be president and first and second
 vice-presidents to fill the permanent or temporary absences of
 the former. There shall also be a secretary, freely elected, as
 well as such inferior employds as may be deemed necessary.
 The board of the Council of State shall be renewed annually.
 90. The duration of the Council of State shall be for the
 same constitutional period as that for which it has been elected.
 91. The same qualities shall be required to become a Coun-
 cillor as to become President of the Republic.
 92. The Council shall meet as often as its regulations require,
 and the latter shall be fixed by itself ; it cannot deliberate unless
 at least two-thirds of its member:, are present, and it shall
 possess the attributions laid down in this Constitution anti the
 laws.
 93. The Ministers of State shall have the right of voice in
 the Council, and can be present at its sessions when they consider
 it convenient, and must attend them when called upon to give
 information on any matter.
 94. The attributions of the Council of State are
 (1.) To give its consultative vote within the lapse of eight
 working days in any of the cases of Article 81,'' to be submitted
 to the consideration of the President of the United States of
 Venezuela through the medium of the Minister concerned; and
 in cases declared urgent by the Executive they shall be ready to
 give the said vote within the space of two working days.
 (2.) To grant or deny its assent to the exercise by the President of the Republic of any of the attributions conferred by
 Article 82.J
 (3.) To grant or deny its consent to the additional credits
 which the Ministers of the respective branches may solicit.
 (4.) To give its opinion in any other affair relating to the
 general administration that may be submitted to its consideration.
 (5.) To present annually to Congress reports and observations that are considered convenient upon laws and administration.
 95. The laws may attribute to the Council of State functions
 consistent with its high character.
 96. The vote of the Council of State is by the absolute
 majority of the members present. Councillors who disagree with
 the opinion of the majority have the right to reserve their vote.
 97. The Councillors are liable for treason to the country,
 for corruption or bribery in the discharge of their functions, for
 infraction of the Constitution and laws, and offences at common
 law.
 Section 5.-Of the M1linisters of State.
 98. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall
 have for its Cabinet the Ministers indicated by law. The latter
 shall determine their functions and duties, and shall organize
 their secretarial departments.
 99. To be a Minister of State it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, and have completed 25 years of age.
 100. The Ministers are the legal, sole and necessary instruments of the President of the United States of Venezuela. All
 acts of the latter shall be countersigned by the Minister or
 Ministers to whose Department the said Acts refer; and without
 this requisite they shall be devoid of force, and shall not be
 carried out nor executed by the authorities, employds, or private
 individuals.
 101. All acts of the Ministers shall be in conformity with this
 Constitution and with the laws; their personal responsibility shall
 not be saved by an order of the President, although they receive
 it in writing.
 102. The responsibility for acts of the President which have
 to be passed by the Council of Ministers attaches to them jointly.
 103. The Ministers shall give an account to the Chambers
 every year, within the first ten days of their ordinary sessions,
 in detailed reports, substantiated by documents, of what they
 have done or attempted to do in their respective branches. They
 shall also furnish the written or verbal reports which may be
 asked of them, and shall likewise present within the first ten
 days of the second month of the sessions of the Chambers the
 general estimate of revenue and expenditure and the general
 accounts of the preceding year.
 104. The Ministers shall have the right of speech in the
 Chambers, and are obliged to attend them whenever called upon
 to report.
 105. The Ministers are responsible:-
 (1.) For treason to the country;
 (2.) For infringement of the Constitution and laws;
 (3.) For incurring expenditure greater than appears in their
 estimates;
 (4.) For corruption or bribery in the dispatch of the business
 of their office, or in the appointment of public employees;
 
 (5.) For malversation of public funds; and
 (6.) For offences at common law.
 CHIA'TER VII.-Of the Judicial Power.
 Section 1
 100. The judicial power of the republic resides in the Federal
 Court of Cassation and the other Tribunals and Courts of Justice
 established by law.
 107. The employees of the judicial power are responsible in
 the cases determined by law: for treason against the country,
 for corruption or bribery in the discharge of their duties, for
 infringement of the Constitution and laws, and for offences at
 common law.
 Section 2.- Of the Federal Court of Cassation.
 108. The Federal Court of Cassation is the Supreme Tribunal
 of the Federation and of the States, and shall be composed of
 seven members elected by Congress every four years within the
 first thirty days of its meeting.
 The members of the Federal Court of Cassation shall be
 Venezuelans by birth, adults of 30 years of age, and lawyers of
 the republic.
 100. For the appointment to the Federal Court of Cassation,
 the representatives of the States of the federal district shall be
 grouped in Congress in the following manner, and each group
 shall present two candidates in order that from among them
 Congress may elect the member of the Federal Court of
 Cassation, who is to represent each group therein:-
 First group: States of Aragua and Miranda and the Federal
 District.
 Second group: States of Carabobo, Cojedes, and Guirico.
 Third group: States of Mdrida, TUichira, and Trujillo.
 Fourth group: States of Lara, Falcdn, and Zulia.
 Fifth group: States of Zamora, Portugueza, and Yaracuy.
 Sixth group: States of Apure, Anzoitegui, and Bolivar.
 Seventh group: States of Sucre, Nueva Esparta, and Monagas.
 110. The Federal Court of Cassation shall be elected by
 Congress by secret vote and in permanent session.
 The seven candidates designated by the groups who have
 not been elected as members of the Federal Court of Cassation
 shall become de facto substitutes for the respective members.
 111. The members of the Federal Court of Cassation shall
 remain in office four years, and may be re-elected; and in case
 of the permanent absence of the principals or substitutes, their
 places shall be filled by Congress, and in the recess thereof, by
 the President of the Republic ; and for this purpose the Court
 shall give the necessary information.

 
 
 112. The duties of the Federal Court of Cassation are:-
 (I.) To take cognizance of accusations brought against the
 President of the Republic, or whosoever acts for him, against
 the councillors of State, Cabinet Ministers, Procureur-Gdnaral of
 the nation, Governor of the Federal District, and against their
 own members, in the cases in which said functionaries are
 responsible, according to this Constitution.
 (2.) To take cognizance of criminal cases, or those involving
 the responsibility of 'the Presidents of the States and of other
 high functionaries of the same, as their laws determine; applying,
 when the question is one of responsibility, the laws of their own
 States, and in default thereof the general laws of the nation.
 In the two preceding cases the Court shall declare whether or
 not there is ground for prosecution: if the former, the functionary
 is de facto suspended; if the latter, all proceedings shall cease.
 If the offence be one at common law, the matter shall go on to
 the ordinary Tribunals; and if it be of a political nature, the
 Court shall continue to take cognizance thereof until final
 sentence is passed.
 (3.) To take cognizance of civil or criminal cases brought
 against diplomatic officials in the cases permitted by the law of
 nations.
 (4.) To take cognizance of cases involving responsibility
 which may be brought against the diplomatic agents of the
 republic accredited to other countries for abuse of their
 functions.
 (5.) To take cognizance of civil cases when the nation is
 the defendant and the law so determines.
 (6.) To take cognizance of appeals in cassation in the form
 and terms established by law.
 (7.) To take cognizance of prize cases.
 (8.) To decide, save in the exceptions established in Article
 144' of this Constitution, the controversies which arise between
 political functionaries of different States, between one or more
 States and the functionaries of the Union or of the federal
 district, between those of the Union among themselves or with
 those of the federal district, and between the Tribunals and
 national functionaries in matters within the competence of the
 Court.
 (9.) To adjust any contentions which may arise between the
 judicial employees or functionaries of the several States and
 between them and those of the nation or of the federal district,
 and between those of a State or of the federal district, always
 provided that there exists no State authority competent to decide
 them.
 (10.) To declare the nullity of the national laws or those of the
 States when they clash with the Constitution of the Republic.
 (11.) To declare which law  shall be in force when the
 national laws clash with each other or with those of the States.
(12.) To declare the nullity of all Acts of the Legislative
 Chambers or national executive that violate the rights guaranteed
 to the States or that attack their autonomy, and of Acts of the
 Legislatures or Municipal Councils that clash with paragraphs 10,
 11, 12, and 13 of Article 12* of this Constitution.
 (13.) To declare the nullity of all Acts referred to in
 Articles 30 and 31t of this Constitution, whether they emanate
 from the authority of the nation or of the federal district or of
 the high functionaries of the States.
 (14.) To take cognizance of the controversies resulting from
 contracts or negotiations made by the President of the Republic.
 (15.) To declare, saving the provision of public Treaties, the
 executive force of the decisions of foreign authorities, subject
 to the conditions established by law.
 (16.) Other attributions prescribed by this Constitution and
 the laws.
 113. The Federal Court of Cassation shall render every year to
 the National Congress an account of their work, and at the same
 time shall give information of the difficulties which, in their
 opinion, stand in the way of harmonizing civil, criminal, and
 commercial legislation.
 114. The members of the Federal Court of Cassation, who
 have entered upon the exercise of their functions, whilst
 exercising these, shall accept no employment whatsoever from
 the federal executive.
 115. The law shall prescribe the salaries allowed to the
 members of the Federal Court of Cassation.
 Section 3.-Of the Procureur-General of the Nation.
 116. The " Ministerio Publico " shall be under the direction
 of the Procureur-General of the nation, in conformity with
 the law.
 117. To be Procureur, it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by
 birth, of 30 years of age, and a lawyer of the republic.
 118. The Procureur-G6n6ral shall remain in office two years,
 and may be re-elected; and in his permanent or temporary
 absence, the office shall be filled by two substitutes in the order
 of their election.
 In the permanent absence of the substitutes, the office shall
 be filled by the Chamber of Deputies; and during the recess
 thereof by the President of the Republic.
 119. The functions of the Procureur-General are
 (1.) To promote the execution of the laws and of the
 administrative regulations;
 (2.) To issue all judicial reports which the federal executive
 and the Federal Court of Cassation demand;
 (3.) To watch that all the federal employees discharge their
 duties;

 (4.) To initiate on the demand of the President of the
 Republic proceedings before the competent authority, against
 federal functionaries for misconduct in the exercise of their
 official duties, making them responsible for the same;
 (5.) To exercise the office of fiscal in the trials referred to
 in paragraphs 1, 2, and 4, respecting the attributions of the
 Federal Court of Cassation
 (6.) To give an account to the President of the Republic for
 his actions in the discharge of functions 1, 3, and 4 which are
 assigned to him by this Article;
 (7.) To promote and conduct the causes in which the nation
 is interested, and to defend its rights in the actions or claims
 that are brought against it, carrying out in either case the
 instructions which are communicated to him by the federal
 executive; and
 (8.) To execute the other duties which this Constitution and
 the law prescribe.
 CHAPTER VIII. - General Dispositions.
 120. All that has not been expressly attributed to the
 general administration of the nation in this Constitution, is
 within the competence of the States. These shall lay down in
 their respective Constitutions that the constitutional period of
 their public powers shall last four years, counting from the 20th
 February, 1910.
 121. All Magistrates, authorities, or corporations are forbidden to exercise any function whatsoever that is not expressly
 attributed to them by the Constitution and laws.
 122. The Tribunals of Justice in the States are independent.
 The cases initiated in them shall be concluded in the same States,
 without other examination than that of the Federal Court of
 Cassation in those cases in which the law permits it.
 123. All Acts of the Legislative Chambers or of the federal
 executive that violate the rights guaranteed to the States, or
 attack their autonomy, shall be declared void by the Federal Court
 of Cassation, in conformity with paragraph 12 of Article 112*.
 124. The national public force shall be divided into naval and
 land forces, and shall be composed of the militias of citizens
 organized in conformity with the law.
 125. The public force in charge of the national authority
 shall be formed of a contingent which each State shall furnish in
 proportion to its population, calling up for service those citizens
 who are liable according to law.
 126. In case of war, the contingent may be increased by
 bodies of citizen militia until the number of men necessary to
 meet the requirements of the National Government shall be
 attained.
 127. Military and civil authority shall not be exercised at
 the same time by the same person or corporation, except in the
 case of disturbance of public order.
 128. The right of ecclesiastical patronage, being in possession
 of the nation, shall be exercised in conformity with the provisions
 of the law of the 28th July, 1824.
 129. The National Government shall not have in the States
 other resident officials with jurisdiction or authority, except the
 officials of the States themselves. Exception is made for those
 of finance; those of public instruction; those that may be
 rendered necessary by the organization which th3 National
 Congress may give to the mines, Government waste lands.
 salines, and alcohol revenue, in the exercise of the powers which
 paragraph 28 of Article 12* of this Constitution confers on it;
 those belonging to the forces destined for the supervision of the
 frontiers, and which garrison fortresses, artillery posts, military
 stations, and customs ports, and those shall only have jurisdiction
 in that which concerns their respective duties, and within the
 limits of the fortresses and barracks and military stations and
 customs ports; provided that they shall submit to the general
 laws of the States in which they reside, and are subject to be
 immediately removed or replaced by the federal executive or by
 whoever is competent to do so, at the demand of the Government
 of the State concerned, and for legitimate reasons.
 130. The national officials shall not accept gifts, offices,
 honours, nor rewards from foreign nations without the consent
 of the Senate.
 131. All warlike material shall belong to the nation.
 132. Any citizen may accuse the national officials and
 employees of the States before the Tribunals or superior
 authorities that the laws may designate.
 133. Exportation is free in Venezuela, and no customs duty
 shall be imposed thereon.
 134. No expenditure shall be made from the National
 Treasury for which a sum has not been expressly applied by
 Congress in the general estimates of public expenditure or for
 which an additional credit has not been voted by the Government Council; and those who infringe this disposition shall be
 civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the sums that
 have been paid. In all payments ordinary expenses shall have
 preference over extraordinary ones. When the sum granted is
 not sufficient, or in cases of emergency the Minister of the
 Department concerned shall demand the grant of a credit
 supplementary to that chapter of the budget, provided that no
 payments be made before obtaining the affirmative vote of the
 Council of State. All additional credits shall be submitted to
 the approval of Congress.
 135. Neither the legislative power nor any authority of the
 Republic shall in any case, or for any motive whatsoever, issue
 paper money, or declare the forced circulation of bank-notes, or
 

 any security represented by paper. Neither shall the coinage of
 silver or nickel money be allowed without the previous consent
 of the National Congress, given with the same procedure as that
 established for the sanction of laws.
 136. The departments for the collection of the national
 revenues and for their expenditure shall always be kept separate,
 and the former shall not be able to make any payments, except
 those of the salaries of its employees.
 137. At election periods the national public force and that
 of the States shall remain in barracks during the course of
 popular elections.
 138. In international Treaties the following clause shall be
 inserted:-
 "All differences between the Contracting Parties shall be
 decided by arbitration without appeal to war."
 139. No person shall discharge at the same time more than
 one salaried office by appointment of Congress or of the federal.
 executive. The acceptance of any second office is equivalent to
 the resignation of the first. From this disposition shall be
 excepted the employees of public instruction.
 140. The armed force cannot express opinions (" deliberar");
 it is passive and obedient. No armed body shall make requisitions nor demand help of any kind except from the civil
 authorities, and in the manner and form determined by law.
 Commanders who infringe this disposition shall be judged
 and punished in conformity with the laws.
 141. The law shall regulate the manner in which the national
 employees on taking possession of their appointments shall take
 oath to discharge their duties.
 142. No contract of public interest made by the Federal
 Government or that of the States, by the municipalities, or by
 any other public authority, shall be transferred wholly or in part
 to a foreign Government; and in all such contracts shall be
 considered incorporated, although it may not be expressed, the
 following clause: " The disputes and controversies of whatever
 nature that may arise in connection with this contract, and that
 cannot be settled amicably by the Contracting Parties, shall be
 decided by the competent Tribunals of Venezuela, in conformity
 with its laws, and cannot for any motive or any cause become
 the subject of foreign claims." Companies formed to carry out
 the above-mentioned contracts shall establish their legal domicile
 in the country.
 143. International law shall form part of the national legislation, but its dispositions shall not be quoted when they are in
 opposition to the Constitution and laws of the republic.
 144. The controversies existing between States with reference
 to their boundaries, and those which in the future may arise from
 the same cause, shall be submitted for their decision by the States
 concerned to a Tribunal of arbitrators, to be freely appointed by
 the federal executive.
 145. This Constitution is susceptible of amendments or
 
 additions; but neither one nor the other shall be decreed by
 the National Congress, except in ordinary session, and when
 solicited by three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the
 States in ordinary session: but the amendments or additions
 shall only be made with respect to those points on which the
 majority of the States are agreed, and they shall only come into
 force after the public power of the nation which solicited or
 sanctioned them have been renewed.
 146. Constitutional amendments and additions shall be made
 with the same procedure as that established for sanctioning
 laws.
 147. An amendment or addition having been agreed to by
 the National Congress, its President shall submit the same to
 the Legislative Assemblies of the States for definite ratification.
 148. Congress may also take the initiative in amendments
 or additions, and grant them by the procedure indicated in the
 preceding article, but in that case they shall not be considered
 sanctioned without the ratification of three-fourths of the
 Legislative Assemblies of the States.
 149. Whether the Legislative Assemblies of the States or
 the Legislative Chambers initiate amendments or additions, the
 definite vote of the States shall always be returned to the
 National Congress on which the duty of scrutinizing them
 devolves.
 150. The constitutional period of the federal power will
 continue for four years, and shall be counted from the
 19th April, 1910.
 151. For all acts of civil and political life of the States,
 the base of the population shall be that determined by the last
 census of the republic and approved by Congress.
 152. In all public acts and official documents of the nation or
 of the States the date of the independence beginning from the
 19th April, 1810, and the federation from the 20th February,
 1859, shall be quoted.
 153. The present Constitution shall be promulgated and put
 into force as soon as it is found by scrutiny of the National
 Congress of the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States
 that they have ratified the amendments and additions.
 154. From the time that this Constitution is put into force
 until the 19th April, 1910, a provisional period shall be opened,
 within which time the definite organization of the republic shall
 be prepared in accordance with the following.
 Temporary Dispositions.
 155. Congress shall elect the provisional President of the
 United States of Venezuela with the formalities established by
 this Constitution to elect the said functionary.
 156. The provisional President of the Republic shall have
 full authority to dictate all the measures, dispositions, decrees
 and regulations that shall be necessary for the political and

 
 administrative organization of the country during the provisional
 period.
 Final Disposition.
 157. The Constitution of the 27th April, 1904, is annulled.
 Dated at the Federated Legislative Palace at Caracas, on
 the 4th day of the month of August, 1909, 99th year of the
 Independence and 51st year of the Federation.
 The President of the Chamber of Senate,
 Senator for the State of Madrida:
 
 Federal Palace at Caracas, on the 5th August, 1909,
 99th year of the Independence and 51st of the Federation.
 Let it be performed.
 

