A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OP THE 1936 and 1947 CONSTITUTIONS OP VENEZUELA

by Alfred G. Obern

Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the American University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts The American University Washington 6, D. C. 1948

[i]

A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OP THE 1936 and 1947 CONSTITUTIONS OP VENEZUELA

by Alfred G. Obern

Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the American University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts The American University Washington 6, D. C. 1948

[ii]

CONSTITUTION 1 OP THE UNITED STATES OP VENEZUELA RATIFIED BY THE NATIONAL CONGRESS ON SEPTEMBER 14, 1936

THE CONGRESS OP THE UNITED STATES OP VENEZUELA Whereas: A count of the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the Amendments and additions to the Constitution proposed by Congress and submitted to the consideration of these Assemblies, as provided by Article 126 of the Constitution now in force, has shown: 1. That the amendment proposed in Article 5 was

ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 2. That the amendment proposed in Article 17 was

ratified by fourteen Legislative Assemblies; 3. That the addition proposed in Article 18 was

ratified by only thirteen Legislative Assemblies; 4. That the amendment proposed in Article 33 was

ratified by fourteen Legislative Assemblies;

Strozier, W. A., translator, "Constitution of the United States of Venezuela, 1936".

1

5.

That the amendment proposed in Article 35

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 6. That the amendment proposed in Article 37

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 7. That the amendment proposed in Article 5^

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 8. That the amendment proposed in Article 55

was ratified by fourteen Legislative Assemblies; 9That the amendment proposed in Article 56

was ratified by sixteen Legislative Assemblies; 10. That the amendment proposed in Article 57

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 11. That the amendment proposed in Article 6l

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 12. That the amendment proposed in Article 76

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 13. That the amendment proposed in Article 96

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 14. That the amendment proposed in Article 99

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 15. That the amendment proposed in Article 101

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 16. That the amendment proposed in Article 130

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies; 17. That the amendment proposed in Article 133

was ratified by eighteen Legislative Assemblies;

268. 18. That the other amendments and additions pro-

posed by the National Congress were ratified by nineteen of the twenty Legislative Assemblies: Whereas: The revision of Article 4 of the Constitution now in force, requested by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Zamora is not among the amendments and additions agreed upon, and is therefore irrelevant, Be it resolved: Article 1: The present Constitution of the United States

of Venezuela is declared to be ratified with the amendments and additions proposed by the National Congress, except the amendment contained in the proposed Article 18, which shall be suppressed. Article 2: The present Constitution shall be signed by

all the members of the National Congress and shall be presented to the citizen President of the United States of Venezuela for his signature and enforcement. Article 3: The present decree shall be published with the

Constitution. Given in the Federal Legislative Hall, in Caracas, on the sixteenth day of the month of July, 1936—in the 127th year of Independence and the 78th year of the Federation. The President, (L.S.) The Vice President, The Secretaries, Pedro Maria Parra L. A. Celis Paredes Rafael Angel Carrasquel Julio Morales Lara

t-

THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OP VENEZUELA In the Name of Almighty God and in the exercise of the rights granted in Article 126 of the present Federal Pact, decrees this C O N S T I T U T I O N TITLE I THE VENEZUELAN NATION AND ITS ORGANIZATION FIRST SECTION TERRITORY AND POLITICAL DIVISION Article 1. The Venezuelan Nation is the union of all

Venezuelans in a compact of political organization with the name of United States of Venezuela. It is forever

and irrevocably free and independent of all domination or protection by a foreign power. Article 2. The territory of the United States of Venezuela is that which before the political change of 1810 corresponded to the Captaincy General of Venezuela with the modifications resulting from the Treaties negotiated by the Republic. This territory shall never

in part or in whole be ceded, assigned, leased, or in any manner transferred to a foreign Power, not even for a limited time. Article 3. The National territory is divided, for the

270 purposes of interior political organization of the Republic, into States, the Federal District, Federal Territories, and Federal Dependencies. Article 4 (*)2 The States are: Anzoategui, Apure,

Aragua, Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zamora, and Zulia. Article 5. The general boundaries of each one of the

States are those that at present are determined by those indicated from the old Provinces by the Law of the twenty-eighth of April, I856, with the changes resulting from the creation of the Federal District and of the Federal Territories and Dependencies, together with those introduced by the National Constitution of the fifth of August 1909 and those declared and agreed upon later between some States of the Union. Bordering States may, by agreements approved by their respective Legislatures, modify their common frontier making by mutual consent the compensations or concessions of territory that they care to make or by restoring those previously made. Article 6. The Federal District shall be organized by

special Law and shall comprise the Departments Libertador and Vargas. The first consists of the City of Caracas, " 3 Asterisks amended in 19^5. indicate that the article was

271 and its neighboring parishes: El Recreo, El Valle, La Vega, Antimano, and Macarao. And the second consists of the parishes: La Guaira, Maiquetia, Macuto, Carabelleda, Carayaca, Naiguata, and Caruao. The political authority of the Federal Government shall not be restricted by the special Law. The Municipality of the Federal District, as all others of the Republic, shall be completely autonomous and independent of the Federal Power in regard to its fiscal and administrative control and it shall have the power to establish freely its own revenue system, within the limitations determined by Section 3 of Article 18 of this Constitution. Article 7. The City of Caracas is the Capital of

the United States of Venezuela and the seat of the Federal Government, except as prescribed in clause (b), paragraph 23 of Article 100 and in paragraph 24 of the same Article. Article 8. The Federal Territories are: Amazonas and They shall be organized by special laws,

Delta-Amacuro.

with the boundaries that they respectively have at the present time. The boundaries of the said Territories and those of the Federal District with the neighboring States may be

272 changed by agreements between the Federal Executive Power and the governors of these territories provided they are approved by the National Congress and the Legislatures of the respective States. Article 9: The Federal Territories Amazonas and Delta-

Amacuro and others that may be created hereafter, may attain statehood as soon as they satisfy the following conditions: 1. Have at least the population required for the

election of a Congressman in accordance with this Constitution. 2. Give evidence to Congress that they are able

to take care of the public service in all its branches and to meet the expenses that this requires. Article 10: The Federal Dependencies are the Venezuelan Islands in the Sea of the Antilles, except those of Margarita and Coche which constitute the State of Nueva Esparta. These Dependencies may be elevated to the category of Federal Territories. The Government and administration of these Dependencies are under the direct jurisdiction of the Federal Executive. Article 11: Controversies existing between the States by reason of frontiers, and those that may later arise for the same cause between them or with the Federal District or the Federal Territories, shall be decided by the Federal Supreme Court, according to the procedure as directed by Law.

273 Second Section Bases of the Union Article 12: The States enumerated in Article 4 form the Venezuelan Union. They recognize reciprocally their

autonomies; they declare themselves equal in political importance; they reserve to themselves in all its plentitude, the sovereignty not delegated by this Constitution; and they declare that their first duty and that of the Federation is the preservation of independence and the integrity of the Nation. Consequently the States

shall never break the National unity, nor shall they ally themselves with foreign Powers, nor cede to them any portion of their territory, but they shall defend themselves and the Federation from any violence that may endanger the National Sovereignty. Likewise they oblige

themselves to maintain the government of the Union and their own on the fundmental bases expressed in the following articles. Article 13: The Government of the United States of Venezuela and that of each one of the otates of the Union is and shall be always republican, federal, democratic, elective, representative, responsible, and rotating. Article 14: The States shall be divided into Districts whose Municipalities shall enjoy full autonomy and shall be, therefore, independent of the Federal and State Political Powers, in everything relating to its fiscal

274'
and administrative regimes with the only restrictions stated in this Constitution. Article 15: The states agree to delegate to the jurisdiction of the Federal Power: 1. Everything relating to international rela-

tions of the United States of Venezuela as a sovereign Nation. Neither the States nor the Municipalities shall

have the right to establish or carry on political or diplomatic relations with other Nations. 2. Everything concerning the Flag, the Coat of

Arms, the National Anthem, and National Celebrations; and concerning decorations and honorary medals that the Republic may grant. 3. The supreme vigilance for the general inter-

ests of the Venezuelan Nation and the preservation of the public peace in all the National territory. 4. ( * ) The legislation that shall rule in all

the Republic in civil, mercantile, penal, and legal procedure matters. The Laws concerning elections, banks, institutions of credit, social welfare, public health, human and veterinary sanitation; conservation and promotion of agriculture and animal husbandry; conservation, protection, and utilization of the forests, waters, and other natural resources of the country; labor; trademarks; literary, artistic and industrial property; public registry, expropriation for right of eminent domain,

275
immigration, naturalization, expulsion and admission of foreigners, and legislation governing guarantees granted by the Constitution. 5. Legislation relative to weights and measures

that are to be used throughout the Republic. 6. The supervision in favor of the just enforce-

ment of the national laws throughout the territory of the Republic. 7. ( * ) The administration of Justice through

the Federal Court and Supreme Court in matters of the jurisdiction of the latter as far as the present constitution and its corresponding organic law; of ordinary courts in the Federal District and in the Federal Territories and Dependencies; and through the Federal Courts, which will be entitled to seat in the States in cases in which the Venezuelan Nation is a litigant in military trials, in those concerning public lands, mines and salt pits; in cases relating to federal taxes and in the other cases as determined by Law. The Law may empower the

Tribunals of the various otates with functions of Federal Tribunals, in the cases that the same may provide. 8. Everything relating to the Army, to the Navy,

and to Military Aviation. Neither the States nor the Municipalities shall maintain other forces than those necessary for police purposes and prison guards, except those that they may organize by order of the Federal Government.

276 The Army shall be formed from contingents called to service according to population of each one of the States, the Federal District, and Federal Territories and Dependencies, in conformity with the Law of Compulsory Military Service. Militias of citizens and those enlisted as volunteers in accordance with the Law, may also become part of the National Army. All implements of war that are in the country or that may be imported from foreign countries belong to the Nation. 9. tion. Elementary primary instruction is compulsory, and that given in official Institutes shall be free. 10. Everything relating to the National Census The legislation relating to Public Instruc-

and Statistics, according to Law. For all acts in which it may be necessary to take as a basis the population of the Nation or that of the States, of the Federal District or of the Federal Territories the norm shall be the last Census of the Republic approved by Congress. The National Census shall be taken at those times determined by Law. 11. Everything relating to Venezuelan coin

whose type, value, fineness, weight, and coining shall be fixed exclusively by national laws, and to the

277
circulation of foreign money. 12. Everything relating to transportation by

land, to aerial, sea, river, and lake navigation, and to docks and landing works at the ports. The navigation on rivers and other navigable waters that have not required special improvements, shall not be restricted through taxes or privileges. 13. Everything relating to the customs system

for the collection of import duties, which shall accrue entirely to the National Treasury, as well as those for transit on merchandise that coming from abroad passes in transit to other foreign countries. The Customs will continue to collect also, until eliminated by Law, the tax at present known as Territorial Tax, which shall also accrue to the National Treasury. Exportation is free, excepting for those limitations that may be necessary for reasons of public order or of the interests of the Nation. Everything else concerning this matter shall be regulated by National Laws. 14. Everything relating to Post Offices, Tele-

graphs, Telephones, and Wireless Communications. 15. Everything relating to the organization and

regime of the Federal District and the Federal Territories and Dependencies. 16. Everything relating to the laying and main-

tenance of National roads, that is, those that cross a

278 r State or the Federal District or a Federal Territory and pass beyond its boundaries; aerial traction cables and railways, although they may be within the boundaries of a State, except when it is a matter of urban traction cables or tramways, whose franchise and regulation are under the jurisdiction of the respective municipalities. 17. Everything relating to the levying, collec-

tion, and depositing of taxes derived from fiscal seals or stamps, from cigarettes, tobacco, registry, inheritances, matches, rums and liquors, and others that the Law may establish as National Taxes. 18. Everything relating to salt pits, to public

lands, and to its products, to pearl oysters and to mines. The ownership of those possessions will remain

with the State where they are located, but the administration of all shall be under the control of the Federal Executive, who shall exercise it in conformity with their respective laws. In these it shall be stated that salt

pits are inalienable; that mineral concessions shall be temporary, and that public lands may be sold, leased, and given in free adjudication by the Federal Executive, as provided by the same laws, in which there shall be stated for these cases the right of preference in favor of the occupants. Public lands existing in the islands of the sea, of rivers and of lakes may not be alienated, and their use may be granted only in a form that does not involve,

279 directly or indirectly, transfer of ownership of the land. The revenues from salt pits, pearls, mines and public lands, including the proceeds from the sale of the last named, shall go to the National Treasury. 19. Everything relating to the public works

that may be necessary, without limiting the rights of the States and Municipalities to undertake on their own account those that they deem advisable. 20. Finally, any other matter that the present

Constitution may attribute to any of the Powers that form the Federal Government and that has not been mentioned in this article. Article 16. The States oblige themselves to obey and cause to be obeyed and to enforce the Constitution and the Laws of the Union, and the Decrees, Orders, and Resolutions which the Federal Powers may issue in the exercise of their legal powers and duties, in those matters of Federal jurisdiction as enumerated in the preceding article. Article 17. The States have the following powers: 1. ( * ) To formulate their Constitutions and

the Organic Laws defining their Public Powers, according to the principles of this Fundamental Compact; the naming of the Municipal Councils and Legislative Assemblies being made in keeping with Federal Election Laws.

280
r

The Deputies to the National Congress shall be elected according to provisions as stated in Article 55 of this Constitution. It is optional with the States to retain their present names or to change them. 2. To elect their Public Officials according

to their Constitutions and Laws, without prejudice to the fact that in the Constitutions of the States that decide thus, there may be delegated to the President of the Republic certain determined powers. 3. ( * ) To administer justice according to Law terri-

by means of their Tribunals, in their respective

tories, in all civil, mercantile, and penal cases that may occur within their boundaries, except those whose trial so reserved under this Constitution to Federal Judges. Judgments of the State Tribunals shall be subject only to review by the Federal Court of Appeals through those means established by Law and with the purposes stated by Law. 4. To control their Revenues which shall be:

1) The Constitutional Allowance formed by a sum that shall be included annually in the respective General Budget of Public Expenses of the Nation, equivalent to twenty percent of the total receipts from Revenues, taking as a basis for each fiscal year the total of said receipts in the civil year immediately preceding.

281 The sum thus fixed shall be distributed among all the States, the Federal District, and the Federal Territories, in proportion to their population. 2) The revenue from stamped paper, which shall not be required on documents relating to the liquidation and payment of National taxes, nor required for the purpose of making valid, through its use, taxes that this Constitution forbids to be levied. 3) Taxes and other revenues that Legislative Assemblies may levy, with the following restrictions: a) The States may not set up customs, since there shall be only National customs, nor may the States collect duties on imports or exports nor on foreign merchandise in transit to foreign territory; nor on other dutiable materials that constitute federal sources of revenue; nor on those that may be under municipal jurisdiction, according to Article 18. b) Taxes are not to be imposed on fruits, processed foods, products, nor any other sort of national or foreign merchandise, before it is offered for consumption, nor shall a State prohibit the consumption of things that may be produced outside of the State, nor shall commodities produced outside be burdened with duties different from those that are paid on like commodities when they are produced in the locality. c) The States may not demand for the collection of their duties the intervention of the federal fiscal

282 authorities but they may demand of them data and information considered necessary for the establishment, inspection, surveyance of their imports. d) The States may not levy duties to be paid by personal labor, or its equivalent in money. e) There shall not be levied taxes or contributions of any sort on cattle on the hoof; nor on their products or by-products. 4) The exercise of all other rights corresponding to them as autonomous political entities, that have been reserved for them according to Article 12 of the present Constitution. Article 18. Municipalities have the authority: 1. To organize their services of police, supplies,

cemeteries, municipal improvement, civil architecture, public lighting, aqueducts, urban street cars, and others of a municipal character. To organize services for ascer-

taining and eliminating illiteracy in accordance with the federal laws, dispositions, and regulations governing instruction. Hygiene service will be undertaken in ac-

cordance with federal laws and regulations on sanitation, and under the inspection of the federal sanitary service. 2. To administer their Municipal Lands and their

own lands, without being able to dispose of them except for building purposes. 3. To organize their Revenues, with the restric-

tions enumerated in paragraph 4, number 3 of Article 17.

283 The products of agriculture, cattle raising, and fishing, shall only be subject to municipal duties on retail establishments, and said products shall not be burdened with special taxes, nor shall the retail sale of them be unequally taxed. Article 19. (*) States and Municipalities shall give

full faith and credit to acts and judicial procedure emanating from federal authorities, from other States, or from the Federal District, and shall insure their performance and execution. Article 20. Without prejudice to the right to request the services of the Powers of the States in all cases in which they should lend their cooperation to the Federal Government, the latter shall have the right to keep in the territory of the former the necessary federal officials and employees and officers, soldiers and employees of the National Army. The commanders of the military forces and the other federal employees in the States shall have jurisdiction only over matters which concern their respective offices, without any rights or privileges that might distinguish them from other citizens residing in the respective State, but the latter shall not impose on them duties that are incompatible with the federal service to which they are committed.

284 Article 21. The Federal Government may erect In the territory of the States, forts, docks, warehouses, shipyards, aerodromes, penitentiaries, quarantine stations, and other works necessary for the federal administration. Article 22. The States shall not permit In their territory levies or enlistments for military service that might have for their object disturbance of the peace, liberty, or Independence of other nations, or to disturb the internal peace of the Republic. Article 23. Nor shall the States have the right to declare nor cause to be declared war on one another in any case, always being obliged to maintain strict neutrality In dissensions that may occur between other States unless they are required to act for the Federal Government with which they must cooperate in means it may determine upon for the reestablishment of peace. Article 24. Neither the States nor the Municipalities may negotiate loans in foreign countries, and in the contracts that they do authorize they shall be governed by the provisions stated in Article 49 of this Constitution. Article 25. The States may unite, two or more, to form a single State, but each state always reserves the right to restore its autonomy. In either case notification shall

be sent to the Federal Executive, to Congress, and to the other States.

285 Article 26. In all public acts and official documents

of the Nation, of the States, of the Federal District, Federal Territories, Federal Dependencies, and Municipalities, in addition to the date of the calendar, there shall be cited the date of Independence, counting from the nineteenth of April 1810 and the date of the Federation, counting from the twentieth of February 1859. Title II Venezuelans and Their Duties and Rights. Article 27. Venezuelan citizenship is gained by birth and may be acquired by naturalization. Article 28. The following are Venezuelans by birth: 1. Republic. 2. Children of Venezuelan parents, regardless of All persons born within the territory of the

the place of their birth. Article 29. The following are naturalized citizens: 1. Children of age of a father or of a mother who

are naturalized citizens, even though born outside of the territory of the Republic, provided they come to live in the country and manifest their desire to become Venezuelans. 2. Those already born or who may be born in Spain

or in the other Ibero-American Republics, provided they have established their residence in the territory of the Republic and manifested their desire to be Venezuelans and

286 fulfilled all the requirements of the corresponding law. 3. Foreigners who have obtained or who may ob-

tain a naturalization certificate according to law. 4. A foreign woman married to a Venezuelan as

long as wedlock lasts, or one who when the marital union Is dissolved, during the year following the dissolution, manifests her de3lre to continue to be and Is accepted as a Venezuelan. Article 30. Manifestations of desire referred to by numbers 1, 2, and 4 of the preceding article must be made before the Principal Registrar of the respective jurisdiction In which the person concerned may establish his abode, and the former, on receiving them, shall place them in the appropriate Register and shall send a copy of them with the necessary security to the Federal Executive and finding them suitable he shall order their publication in the Official Gazette of the United States of Venezuela, in

conformity with duly established legal requirements. If the Interested party is in a foreign country the manifestation above mentioned shall be made to the Diplomatic or Consular Representative of the Republic, who will forward it to the Minister of Foreign Relations, for its due registry and publication. Citizenship shall not be considered as acquired until the verification of the before-mentioned publication.

287 Article 31. Venezuelans have the duty of defending their country and of carrying out and obeying the Constitution and Laws of the Republic, and the Decrees, Orders and Decisions that may be dictated for execution, by the Public Authorities, according to their duties. They shall not have the right to undertake to serve against Venezuela and if they do so they shall be punished as traitors to the Country. Article 32. The Nation guarantees to its citizens: 1. Inviolability of life; and the penalty of

death may not be exacted by any law or mandate of any authority. 2. (*) The inviolability of property subject only to legal taxes. Only for purposes of public or social service, through previous condemnation proceedings and due payment, shall property be expropriated according to law. Proprietors must observe the measures relating to

Public ^giene, conservation of forests and waters, and other things such as may be legally established for community benefit. The law may, in the interest of the Nation specify special restrictions and prohibitions for the acquisition and transfer of stated classes of property, either because of its nature or its condition, or because of its location in the country. The Nation shall encourage the conserva-

tion and diffusion of medium and small rural property; and it may through legal process and previous indemnity, expro-

288 prlate undeveloped lands of a private estate, to divide them or to transfer them under conditions fixed by law. Confiscation of property shall not be decreed or carried out, except In the following cases: 1. As a means of reprisal in international war, against the nationals of the country with which this nation may be at war, if that nation has previously decreed the confiscation of the property of Venezuelans. 2. In the public interest to repay to the Nation-

al Treasury amounts withdrawn by public officials who have held the office of President of the Republic, of Cabinet members, and of Governor of the Federal District and of Federal Territories, when they have been held liable by the Congress for crimes against the Public or private property. The decision to which this paragraph refers

shall be taken up in Congress in ordinary or extraordinary sessions by an absolute majority and must be approved by two-thirds of the Legislative Assemblies of the States in the same form. The measure shall comprise the totality of

the property of the officials and of their inheritance and shall be carried out in conformity with rules established by special law that shall be passed for this purpose; and it shall be applied retroactively on the officials named who have served during the last two presidential terms. In cases In which there may be demanded extraordinary reimbursement to which the preceding paragraph refers, the claims asked for by private citizens against the official or private citizen affected by the reimbursement or hi3 In-

289 herltance, shall be covered by a moderate quota of his property which In every case shall be fixed by the National Congress on decreeing the measure, and they shall be substantiated and decided according to special procedure established by the law to which reference has been made. The Legislative Assemblies of the States may Insert in their respective Constitutions this measure with respect to their Presidents and General Secretaries. 3. Inviolability of correspondence in all forms,

and that of other private papers, which may be seized only through the disposition of competent judicial authorities and in conformity with formalities fixed by law, but everything must be kept secret with respect to domestic and private affairs not concerned with the case that is being Investigated. Books and documents of merchants and industrialists shall remain subject, in conformity with the Laws and Regulations, to inspection or audit by authorized officials. 4. Inviolability of the home which shall not be

broken Into except to prevent the perpetration or the completion of a crime; or to carry out the decisions which, in accordance with the law, are directed by Courts of Justice in cases that they have tried. Also it shall be sub-

ject to sanitary Inspection according to law. 5. Personal liberty and through it: a) The abolition of forced recruiting for military service which must be carried on only in accordance with law.

290 b) Slavery is forever abolished and slaves

who tread upon the soil of the Republic shall be freed. c) All persons have the right to do whatever does not harm others, and no one shall be forced to do what is not legally ordered, nor prevented from doing what the law does not prohibit. 6. (*) Freedom of thought, expressed by word, by writing, or by means of the press, or by other means of publicity; but subject to penalty, as the law may decide, are those expressions that constitute Injury, calumny, defamation, insult, or instigation to offend. The use of "anonymous" is forbidden, nor shall there be any propaganda for war or any attempt to disturb the political or social order. Communistic and anarchistic doctrines are considered contrary to the independence, to the political form, and to the social peace of the Nation; and persons who proclaim, propagate, or practice them shall be considered as traitors to the country and punished as the laws provide. At all times the Federal Executive shall have the power, whether the constitutional guarantees are suspended or not, to prohibit entrance into the territory of the Republic or to expel from it, for a term of from six months to one year where foreigners are concerned, individuals affiliated with anyone of the aforementioned doctrines, when he considers that their entrance into the territory

291 of the Republic or their remaining In It may be dangerous or threatening to public order or social peace. 7. Freedom of traveling, changing residence, ab-

senting one self from the Republic and returning to It, when legal formalities are complied with; freedom of bringing property into the country except under limitations demanded by public order and Interests of the Nation. 8. Freedom of labor and of industries. Conse-

quently, monopolies shall not be granted for the exclusive exercise of any Industry. There shall be granted, according to law, temporary privileges relative to intellectual property, patents of inventions, and trademarks, and also according to law and for a definite period, franchises for the establishment and the exploitation of railroads, enterprises of aerial navigation, canalization, street railways, hydraulic power, telephone or telegraph lines, and systems of wireless communication; when such works are completed as are undertaken at the expense of the holder of the concession, without financial guarantees or aid from the 3tates or the nation. The law shall take all needed measures for the greater efficiency and encouragement of labor, organizing it properly and establishing special protection for workers and laborers, to amelorlate their physical, moral, and intellectual conditions and to provide for an increase of the population.

292 The state shall provide protection for production and shall establish conditions for labor in the city and in the country, keeping in view the social protection of the worker and of the day laborer and the economic interests of the country. The Republic shall have a Council of National Economy, composed of representatives of the producers and of the consumers, of capital and of labor, and of the liberal professions. The Executive Power shall determine its duties and organization. Legislation concerning labor shall conform to the following rules, besides others that tend to ameliorate the conditions of the worker and laborer: 1. 2. Weekly rest, preferably on Sunday; Annual vacations, with pay;

In carrying out these rules no distinction shall be made between manual labor and intellectual or technical labor. 3. The Nation shall encourage technical train-

ing of workers. The Nation shall encourage European immigration and shall promote, in cooperation with the Governments of the States and Municipalities, the organization of Agricultural Colonies. Farm labor shall be the object of special regulation by the Executive Power. The State shall attempt to establish the day laborer in the country, it shall care for his rural education, and shall assure to

293
the Venezuelan laborer preference in colonization and in profit from national land. The Nation shall foster a system of participation of employees and laborers in the revenues of enterprises and shall encourage savings among them. 9. (*) Freedom of industry and of labor shall not have any limitations other than those demanded by public interest or good usage. However, the Federal Power is empowered to tax certain businesses for the purpose of creating income for the Treasury, and to reserve the operation of certain industries in order to insure public services and the defense and credit of the Nation. 10. The professions that require degrees shall

not be practised without possession of such degrees and without fulfilling formalities required by law. 11. Freedom of public or private assembly without

arms, and without endangering public order, without the authorities being able to exercise any act of compulsion; and freedom of association, this being subject to restrictions and prohibitions fixed by law. The law shall regulate the exercise of the right of assembly. 12. Freedom of petition before any public offi-

cial or any official corporation with the right of obtaining a timely reply. 13The right to prosecute before competent courts

officials that may be guilty of violating their oaths of office.

294
14. (*) The right to vote. Consequently, male

Venezuelans twenty-one years of age who can read and write and who are not subject to interdict or to penal sentence carrying with it 103s of political citizenship, are eligible to elect and to be elected, without other restrictions than those set forth in this Constitution, and those that come from the special conditions of competency or capacity which, for the exercise of certain employments are required by the laws. 15. Free education. The moral and civic education of the child is compulsory, and shall be based on the promotion of national greatness and human solidarity. There shall be, at least, one school in every locality whose population is not less than thirty pupils. 16. Religious liberty, subject to the supreme in-

spection of all cults by the Federal Executive regulated by law, and also subject to the Ecclesiastical Guardianship of the Republic. 17. (*) Individual security, and through it: a) No citizen shall be seized or arrested for debts, that do not arise from crime. b) Nor be judged by Courts or Commissions specially created, but by his usual judges and by virtue of a pre-existing law (except what has been stated in guarantee 2 of this article).

295 c) Nor be seized or held without a preceding summary judicial inquiry for having committed a punishable act that deserves corporal punishment nor without a warrant drawn by the official who orders the detention with the expression of the basis for Issuing it, unless he be surprised in the act. The indictment shall not in any case, be postponed for more than thirty days after detention. d) Nor be held Incommunicado. e) Nor be forced to testify against himself in a criminal case, nor against his ancestors or relatives to the fourth degree by blood or second degree by affinity, nor against husband or wife. f) Nor to continue in detention if according to firm judicial decision the foundations that motivated it have been destroyed, nor after sufficient bond has been posted in those cases in which, pending the trial, the law permits freedom under bond. g) Nor be condemned to suffer a penalty in a criminal case except after having been personally notified Of the charges and having heard them in the form required by law. h) Nor be condemned to corporal punishment for more than twenty years nor to approbrious penalties. Nor shall there be perpetual punishments although they may not be corporal. i) Nor be tried twice for the same crime.

296 j) Nor continue to be deprived of liberty for political motives, after order has been established, unless it is a question of carrying out a penalty already imposed. 18. Equality, in consideration of which: a) All persons shall be judged by the same laws, shall enjoy equal protection of these laws throughout all the territory of the Nation and shall be subject to the same duties, services, and taxes, there being no possible exemptions from these except in the cases where they are permitted by law. b) No titles of nobility nor hereditary distinctions shall be granted, nor positions nor offices the wages or salaries of which shall last longer than the service rendered* c) There shall be given no other official title than that of citizen and you, except in diplomatic formulas. (New Article 33 inserted.) Article 33. (*) The preceding bill of rights must not be understood to exclude any others that may belong to the citizen and which are not included in it. Article 34. (*) No Federal Law, nor Constitution or Laws of the States, nor Municipal ordinances, nor any Regulation, shall impair or damage the rights guaranteed to citizens. Any that may do this shall be void, and such declaration shall be made by the Federal Court of Appeals.

297 Article 35. Persons who issue, sign, execute, or cause to be executed decrees, ordinances, or resolutions that violate any of the rights guaranteed to citizens are guilty of crime and shall be punished according to law, except when such acts concern measures taken for the defense of the Republic or for the conservation or re-establishment of peace, ordered by competent public officials, in their official capacities, in cases provided for in the following article, or in the case provided for in the last paragraph of Section 6 of Article 32. Article 36. Whenever the Republic is involved in an international war or in civil war or whenever there is any danger that either one may occur, or when there is danger of an epidemic or of any other public calamity, or when for any other circumstance such is required in the interest of defense, peace, or security of the nation or of its institutions or its form of government, the President of the Republic in Cabinet meeting, shall have the power, by decree, to restrain or suspend, in all or in a part of the national territory, the exercise of civil guarantees, with the exception, in every case, of those relating to inviolability of life, to proscription of slavery, and to non-condemnation to infamous penalties. The decree shall contain: (l) the circumstances that justify it; (2) a specification of the guarantee or guarantees that are restrained or suspended; and (3) the territory affected by the suspension or restriction.

298 This decree shall be repealed with the termination of the causes which justified it. The restriction of guarantees shall in no wayaffect the functioning of the Public Powers of the Nation, whose members shall always enjoy the prerogatives recognized by law. It shall be possible to arrest, confine, or expel from the territory of the Republic individuals, citizens, or foreigners who endanger the re-establishment or preservation of peace; but such measures shall cease with the termination of the circumstances that gave rise to them, except the expulsion of foreigners, which the Federal Executive may retain if he considers it desirable. TITLE III Aliens Article 37. The rights and duties of aliens shall be determined by law, but in no case shall they be greater than those of Venezuelans. Article 38. Aliens, domiciled or not, who take part in Venezuelan political contests or activities, shall be subject to the same responsibilities as Venezuelans, and may be arrested, confined, or expelled from the territory of the Republic. Article 39. In no case shall either nationals or aliens

have the right to request that the nation, the States or the

299 municipalities, indemnify them for damages, grievances, or expropriations that have not been caused by legitimate authorities acting in an official capacity. TITLE IV Sovereignty and Public Power Article 40. Sovereignty resides in the people, who exercise it by means of Public Powers. Every force or armed group of persons which attributes to itself the rights of the people and speaks in the name of the people is committing the crime of sedition or rebellion against the Public Powers and shall be punished according to the laws. Article 41. The definition of attributes and powers fixes the limits of the Public Powers; everything that exceeds the limits of said definition constitutes usurpation of powers. Article 42. Every authority that is usurped is ineffectual and its acts are null. Likewise, every decision grant-

ed through direct or indirect use of force or under pressure of a subversive group 13 null. Article 43. Exercise of the Public Power carries responsibility of the individual for over-stepping the powers granted by the Constitution, or for violation of the law that fixes his duties, in terms established by this Constitution or the law. All public officers are, besides, subject to punishment, according to law, for any other crime that they may

300 commit* Article 44. Military and civil authority shall never be exercised simultaneously by the same officer, except the President of the Republic, who shall be commander-inchief of the National Army. Article 45. No individual shall hold at the same time more than one remunerative public office. Acceptance of a second office of this kind is equivalent to relinquishing the first, except with respect to substitutions while the substitute does not replace the principal, and in the case of positions in academies, hospitals, contingent tribunals, or institutions of learning, or of charity. Article 46. The armed forces may not deliberate; they are passive and obedient: no armed body may make requisitions or demand help of any sort except of civil authorities and in the form and manner fixed by law; on election days the troops shall remain in their barracks and shall not go out from the barracks, except for duties concerning the public order. Officers of the armed forces who violate these provisions shall be tried and punished according to the laws. Article 47. No tax not authorized by law 3hall be collected, nor shall the National Treasury make any expenditure for which an appropriation has not been made by Congress under the law of the General Budget of Public Collections

301 and Expenditure, unless there shall have been granted an Additional Credit through Executive Decree. Persons who

violate this provision shall be civilly responsible to the National Treasury for the amounts so paid. Article 48. No public employee may accept, while in office, gifts, offices, honors, or rewards from foreign governments without the previous authorization of the Senate* Those who violate this provision shall be pun-

ished as the law demands. Article 49. No contract of public interest made with the Federal Government or with the governments of the States, or with the Municipalities, or with any other Public Power, shall be passed on, in whole or in part, to foreign governments; and in them all there shall be considered as incorporated, even though not expressed, the following clause: "Doubts and controversies of whatever nature that might arise about this contract, and which cannot be settled amicably by the contracting parties, shall be decided by the competent tribunals of Venezuela, in conformity with its laws, without constituting a basis for foreign claims of any nature whatsoever". Nor can this contract be transacted with companies non-legally domiciled in Venezuela, nor shall be passed to them those contracts entered into with third parties. Article 50. Public Power is distributed between the Federal Power, that of the States, and of the Municipality,

302 within limits established by this Constitution. The Federal Power Is divided Into Legislative, Executive, and Judicial. Article 51• Since the Republic has the right of Eccle-

siastical Guardianship, It shall exercise it as determined by the Law of the twenty-eighth of July, 1024. Article 52. The law shall regulate everything relating to the manner in which national officials shall take the oath of faithfully carrying out their duties, on taking possession of their respective offices. Article 53. The constitutional term shall be five years for the President of the Republic, five years for the Federal Court of Appeals after the nineteenth of April 1936, and within that term the Legislative Power shall be renewed as determined by this Constitution. TITLE V The Legislative Power FIRST SECTION Congress Article 54. (*) The Legislative Power is vested in an assembly that is called "Congress of the United States of Venezuela", composed of two chambers: one of Senators and the other of Deputies. Both Senators and Deputies shall hold office for terms of four years, one-half being renewed every two years. The renewal shall take place for

303 the first time, upon approval of this Constitution, by means of the Legislative Assemblies of the States for Senators, and through the Municipal Councils assembled in the Capital of the State, for the Deputies. When the number of Deputies is unequal, the majority shall be renewed. The Legislative Assemblies of the States and the

Municipal Councils assembled, shall declare the Senators and Deputies that are to be renewed. SECOND SECTION The Chamber of Deputies Article 55. (*) Members of the Chamber of Deputies shall be elected by representatives of the Municipalities of each State, one Deputy to be elected for every 35»000 inhabitants, and one more for every excess of 15,000. The State whose population does not reach 35,000 Inhabitants, shall elect one Deputy. In the same manner there shall

be elected alternates for each principal, who shall fill vacancies that may occur, in the order of their election. Article 56. (*) To be a Deputy one must be a natural born Venezuelan, twenty-five years of age, a native of the State or of the Pederal District in which he offers for election, or have resided in it for at least the three years immediately preceding his election. Article 57. (*) The Pederal District and the Pederal Territories, that now have or later have the basis of

304 population established in Article 55, shall also elect Deputies, in conformity with the provisions of this same article. In determining the basis of population, natives

not yet reduced to obedience shall not be counted. Article 58. (*) Powers exclusively allotted to the Chamber of Deputies are: 1. To vote censure of Cabinet officers whose acts deserve it, in the opinion of the Chamber; but the President of the Republic shall not be forced to remove them until the Federal Court of Appeals declares that there is legal cause for bringing them to trial. 2. All others that the laws indicate. THIRD SECTION The Senate Article 59* The Legislative Assembly of each State shall

elect from persons outside the membership, two Senators and two alternates to fill the vacancies of the Senators in order of their election. Article 60. (*) A senator must be a natural born Venezuelan over thirty years of age, and a native of the State that he represents or have resided in it for at least the three years Immediately preceding his election. Article 6l. (*) Powers of the Senate are: 1. To grant to illustrious Venezuelans, twenty-

five years after their death, the honor of having their

305 remains deposited In the National Pantheon. 2. To give or refuse Its consent to national em-

ployees to accept gifts, offices, honors, or rewards from foreign governments, without which approval they shall not accept them. 3. To give or refuse Its consent for the promotion of military officers to the rank of Colonel and above and of naval officers Including Captain and above. 4. All other powers for which the laws provide. FOURTH SECTION Powers Common to Both Chambers Article 62. The Legislative Chambers shall convene every year in the Capital of the Union, on the nineteenth of April or the nearest date thereto possible unless it be necessary to convene prior thereto. The sessions shall last not over ninety days; in this period all days and hours shall be lawful and all sessions held within them shall be considered as ordinary sessions. The Legislative Chambers may convene also in extraordinary sessions, whenever the Congress is called in session by the Executive Power, but in this case there shall not be considered, during these sessions, matters different from those that have been stated in the call, except that in acting on them it may be necessary also to amend legislation that is in force in related matters.

306 Article 63. Two-thirds of the membership shall COB stltute a quorum In each Chamber at the opening session, and lacking this number, those present shall declare themselves a Preparatory Commission and shall decide on ways that might be suitable for bringing in those absent. After the opening session, the subsequent sessions may be held with the presence of an absolute majority of the members of the respective Chamber. Article 64. The sessions shall be public, but they 3hall be secret whenever the Chamber so decrees. Article 65. The Chambers have the following rights: 1) To draw up their respective Internal Rules and Rules for Debate and to decide upon the punishment of those who violate them. 2) To provide for the policing of the building where their sessions are held. 3) To reprimand or punish spectators who are disorderly. 4) To remove any obstacles that might oppose the legal exercise of their functions. 5) To order the execution of their own resolutions. 6) To qualify their members and to receive their resignations. Article 66, The Chambers shall function in the 3ame city,

they shall open and close their sessions on the same day and at the same hour, and neither of the two shal suspend

307 them before the end of the ninety days fixed by Article 62 of this Constitution for the exercise of its functions, nor change residence without the consent of the other Chamber. In case of divergence they shall meet In Con-

gress and what it decides shall be carried out. Article 67. The exercise of any public office is incompatible with the position of Senator or Deputy during the sessions. Article 68. The Law shall designate the salaries that are to be paid for the services of the members of Congress, and such salaries that shall not be increased except for the term immediately following. Article 69. Senators and Deputies, for a period beginning thirty days before the nineteenth of April and ending thirty days after the end of the sessions, shall enjoy immunity, in virtue of which, they shall not: 1. Be seized, arrested, confined, or in any manner detained, or restrained in the exercise of their duties, even when during this time they commit a crime. If the punishable act of which they are accused deserves corporal punishment, the Indictment shall be suspended, during the period of the immunity, without the limitation of time on the indictment, of the restriction in section c ) , guarantee 17, Article 32 of the present Constitution; but all diligence shall be used in the investigation of the deed. They shall also enjoy immunity, when they are summoned to extraordinary sessions.

308 2. Be forced to appear for trial, in any form,

nor for any motive, nor to give oath during the same period, which period shall not be counted in the period of limitation of the respective action. The Chambers shall not, in any case, make it easy for immunity to be abused in the case of any of its members. Article 70. Members of the Chambers are not held responsible for opinions expressed in the Chambers. Article 71. Senators and Deputies shall not make any contract with the Federal Executive either for themselves or for another, nor shall they represent before him claims for a third party. Article 72. When through death or any other cause that might produce a vacancy, the list of Substitutes for Senators in a state may be exhausted or its number reduced, the corresponding Legislative Assembly shall fill the vacancy that has occurred, for the remainder of the Legislative term. With regard to vacancies that might occur in the Chamber of Deputies, the Constitutions of the States and the Organic Law of the Federal District shall determine the manner of filling them.

309
FIFTH SECTION The Chambers United in Congress Article 73. The Chambers shall function separately, but they shall unite in Congress whenever such is determined by this Constitution or the Laws or whenever one of the Chambers invites the other for such. If the Chamber in-

vited accepts, it shall set the day and the hour for the meeting. Article 74. The acts that the Legislative Chambers pass functioning separately as Co-legislative Bodies shall be designated "Laws", and those that they pass meeting in Congress, or separately, for the private affairs of each one, shall be called "Resolutions". Article 75. The presiding officer of Congress shall be the President of the Senate, and the Presiding officer of the Chamber of Deputies shall act as Vice-president. Article 76. The Chambers united in Congress have the following powers: 1. To elect and nominate as granted by this Constitution and the Laws. 2. To consider the resignation of the President

of the United States of Venezuela or of the person who is exercising his authority. 3. To examine the annual Report that the President

of the Republic must present.

310 4. To examine and approve or reject the Reports

and Accounts that the Cabinet officers must present, In keeping with Article 109 of this Constitution. 5. To elevate to the category of State of the

Union the Federal Territory that petitions it, provided it fulfills the conditions set forth in Article 9 of this Constitution. 6. To examine the Additional Credits decreed

by the President of the Republic in Cabinet Meeting with the consent of those approving, and give their approval, provided they have followed the proceedings established by this Constitution. SIXTH SECTION Powers Common to Both Chambers as Co-legislative Bodies Article 77. (*) The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, while acting as Co-legislative Bodies, have the following powers: 1. To levy all national taxes. 2. To determine loans on National Credit and

pass upon matters concerning the National Debt. 3. To create or abolish national offices and, in general, to legislate, concerning the functioning of the Federal Power. 4. .To legislate concerning the national currency, fixing its type, value, quality, weight, and coining, and concerning the admission and circulation of foreign money;

but in no case, nor for any reason, shall It be possible to decree or authorize the circulation of bank notes not guaranteed by adjustment or metallic reserve fixed by law, nor the circulation of any security represented by paper, since the gold standard shall always be maintained. 5. To approve or refuse International or Diplomatic Treaties and Agreements, and without its approval shall not be valid nor ratified nor exchanged. Treaties shall not be officially published before having been ratified and exchanged. 6. To approve or disapprove contracts for the

construction of railroads, aerial traction cables, establishments of telegraphic or wireless communications, immigration and colonization, and other affairs of national interest agreed to by the Federal Executive and authorized by the Constitution or the Laws. Exception to the

above are mineral contracts or titles and those of unappropriated lands. 7. To authorize the Executive Power, under penalty

of nullity, to transfer the real property of the private possessions of the Nation. 8. To fix and make uniform national weights and measures in keeping with the metric decimal system. 9. To ratify the Enactment of the General Budget

of public receipts and disbursements, in which shall be fixed the salaries of federal employees and everything relating to expenses that are to be incurred in the respective fiscal year.

312 Congress shall not have the power, outside of the disbursements Included In the aforementioned Law, to order the disbursement of any other fixed sum, by means of special Laws, or by Regulations. 10. To examine whether in the taking of the

National Census, each time that this is taken, the formalities of the law have been followed, and for this purpose the Federal Executive shall submit it to Congress. 11. To establish the special system of adminis-

tration applicable to the Federal Territories. 12. To determine the Increase that may be nece-

ssary on the basis of population for the election of Deputies according to the last approved Census. 13. To promulgate Laws for the promotion of insti-

tutions of social solidarity. 14. To promulgate Laws of general character con-

cerning civil pensions, superannuations, military retirements, and pensions, payable by the National Treasury. In the Enactment of the General Budget of Public Receipts and Disbursements the National Congress shall fix the proportion or proportions in bulk that are allotted to these expenses and the Federal Executive shall justly distribute them, stipulating In each particular case the respective share through the agency of the proper Minister, all according to Law. 15. To declare war and request the Executive to negotiate peace.

313
16. To approve or reject peace Treaties negotiated by the Federal Executive. 17. To promulgate a Law for the Information and

replacement of the constituted forces of the Army and the Navy* 18. 19* 20. To legislate with regard to Civil Aviation. To grant amnesties. To legislate on everything relating to the

safety of ports and seacoasts. 21. To legislate concerning the Electoral Cen-

sus, National Education, the National Array and Navy, the Organization of the National Treasury, Sea and River Navigation, Docks, Postoffices, Telegraph Systems, Wireless Communications, Railroads, National Roads and transit over them of mechanical or similar traction vehicles, Unappropriated Lands, Salt Mines, Pearl Fishing, and Mines. 22. To legislate on other matters mentioned in

number 4 of Article 15* and in general on all those under federal jurisdiction. Article 78. (*) The Chambers have the right to name investigating Committees. The national, state, municipal,

and judicial administrative authorities must submit to such committees information and documents that they may request.

314.
SEVENTH SECTION Formation of the Laws Article 79. Laws may be Initiated In either Chamber,

whenever at least three members of the Chamber present a proposal. A law may also be Initiated by the Executive Power through the agency of the Minister whose office Is concerned with the contents of the proposal. Article 80. The proposal presented shall be admitted or rejected, after having been read. If It be admitted,

three discussion periods shall be given to It at Intervals of one day, at least, and with due observance of the rules as established for debates. Article 81. If the proposal is approved in one of the Chambers, it shall pass to the other so that It might be subjected in it to the three required discussions. If also it is here approved, it shall return to the Chamber of its origin with any changes that might have been made. Article 82. If the initiating Chamber does not accept the changes, it shall have the right to insist on its Proposal sending its reasons in writing to the other Chamber, and If the latter accept them, the Proposal shall become a Law. If It is rejected, the Chambers shall meet in Con-

gress and here shall be discussed anew the articles on which there had been differences, and together, deciding by majority vote, they may agree to give them a different

wording from that which had been adopted In one or the other Chamber. Article 83. Proposals rejected In the sessions of one year shall not be presented again until the following year or later years. Sole paragraph. Proposals that remain In suspense

In ordinary session of the Chambers, may be discussed In extraordinary sessions immediately following, If the Federal Executive calls such sessions for this purpose. Article 84. In the Laws this formula shall be used: "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela Decrees". Article 85. Laws shall be repealed only by other Laws. Laws may be amended totally or partially but In case of partial amendment It shall be printed In whole with the changes that have been made. Article 86. (*) Legislative acts, once passed, shall be drawn up In duplicate Just as they were worded In the discussions, without there being added to the text any modifications or changes. Both texts shall be signed by the President, Vice-president, and the Secretaries of Congress, with the date of Its final approval; one of these texts shall be sent to the President of the Republic so that he might countersign It with the respective Minister or Ministers and have it published In the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela.

316, Article 87. (*) In case of evident discrepancy between the original and the printed copy of the Law, It shall be published again In corrected form In the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela. Article 88. The law shall be In force on the date that It Itself Indicates, and In the absence of such Indication, It shall be In force from the day of Its publication in the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela. Article 89. (*) The right of Congress to legislate may not be delegated. Article 90. (*) No ex post facto law shall be passed, except when it imposes a smaller penalty. Laws of legal

procedure shall be applicable from the date on which they become effective, even In lawsuits that are In course of trial; but in this case, if the trial were a penal case, evidence that might have been rejected, according to the law when said evidence was presented, shall be permitted, in so far as it benefits the accused. The provision of Article 32 of this Constitution remains In force without diminution.

317 TITLE VI Federal Executive Power FIRST SECTION General Administration Article 9. (*) Everything relating to the Federal Administration, not delegated to any other authority by this Constitution, is delegated to the Federal Executive Power, which shall be exercised by a Magistrate called "President of the United States of Venezuela", together with the Cabinet officers who are his agents. Article 92. The duties of the Federal Executive shall not be exercised outside the Federal District, except in cases provided for by numbers 23 and 24 of Article 100. Article 93. The Executive Power shall enforce its decisions, and shall exercise the general administration committed to it, through employees and federal agents designated by the formal laws or acts of each official organ; and it may request the assistance of the Governments of the States in the cases permitted by the Constitution. SECOND SECTION The President of the United States of Venezuela Article 9^. (*) To be eligible for the Presidency of the United States of Venezuela, one must be a natural-born Venezuelan, at least thirty years of age, of secular status, and in possession of all his civil and political rights.

318 Article 95. The President of the Republic shall hold office for five years, and shall be ineligible to succeed himself for the term immediately following. Nor shall one be elected who has been President for the last entire year of the preceding constitutional term, nor the relatives of one or the other as far as the fourth degree of blood relationship or the second degree of affinity. Article 96. Within the first fifteen days of each constitutional term, the Chambers in joint session, shall elect the President of the United States of Venezuela. The session in which this is to take place, shall be fixed at least five days previously, and shall be published in the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela. Article 97. The President of the Republic shall, in the presence of Congress, take the oath to faithfully and loyally fulfill his duties. If for any reason he cannot

take the Oath before Congress, he shall take it before the Federal Court of Appeals. Until the President-elect

takes possession of the office the preceding President shall continue in office with the title of Holder of the Federal Executive Power; but if one month elapses after the adjournment of the sessions of Congress without the President-elect taking theoath of office before the Federal Court of Appeals, the Presidency shall be considered vacant and the procedure set forth in the following article shall be followed,

319
Article 98. Temporary vacancies In the Presidency of the Republic shall be filled by the Cabinet Officer that the President may designate. In case of a complete vacancy In the Presidency, Congress shall make provision In the manner Indicated In Article 96, for the unexpired part of the respective term. If Congress Is not In ordinary session, It shall be called Immediately In extraordinary session by the Holder of the Federal Executive Power In accordance with the preceding article, or by the Minister who In conformity with the following paragraph Is exercising the duties of the President, If the absolute vacancy of the Presidency occurs after the President-elect has entered upon the duties of his office, provisionally the office shall be filled by the Minister who at the date on which the absolute vacancy occurred was in charge of It, In conformity with the first part of this article; and If no one was In charge, likewise provisionally, it shall be filled by the Minister selected by the Cabinet by majority vote. In either case, the

Minister shall fill the Presidency until the Presidentelect takes office. Article 99« For the general intent of the preceding ar-

ticle, it shall not be considered a temporary vacancy of office when the President is absent from the capital provided he does not leave the territory of the Republic. In

320 whatever part of the Republic he may be, even outside the cases expressly provided for In number 23, sentence b, and 24 of Article 100, he may communicate his Instructions to the Cabinet Officers for the Resolutions that it may be necessary to issue in the Capital. THIRD SECTION Duties of the President of the United States of Venezuela Article 100. The duties of the President of the United States of Venezuela are: 1. To name and remove Cabinet Ministers. 2. To command the National Army and Navy per-

sonally, or through a person or persons that he may designate to do so, and to fix the number of the forces of the Army and the Navy. 3. 4. To direct war. To receive Foreign Ministers according to the

practices of International Law. 5. To sign Official Papers directed to Chiefs of State. 6. To exercise according to Law, superior civil

and political authority of the Federal District, by means of a Governor who may be freely chosen or removed by him. 7. To administer the Federal Territories in con-

formity with its Organic Law3, and the Federal Dependencies.

321 8. (*) To add "Let it be executed" to the Constitution and to the Laws and to have them published in the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela as soon as possible after receiving them. As soon as a Law approv-

ing an international or diplomatic treaty or pact receives the "Let it be executed", it is delivered at the discretion of the Federal Executive, in conformity with international usage and Conventions in the conduct of the foreign relations of the Republic. 9. To arrange that temporary charge of the Presi-

dency of the Republic be taken by some member of the Cabinet, when he believes such advisable, he being able to take charge again at any time within the constitutional term. In any case he will retain the exercise of dut-

ies 2 and 3 of the President of the Republic, and the Minister Holder of the Presidency shall have to exercise in agreement with him the duties 1, 6, 7, 17, 18, 23, 25, 26 of this same article. 10. 11. To have the Constitution and Laws enforced. To exercise in the Council of Ministers the

authority of interpreting the Laws without changing their spirit, purpose and reason, and of correcting and amending totally or partially the ordinances of the Laws, in every case publishing completely the new ordinance, with the respective Law repealing the previous one. 12. To negotiate, through the respective Minister

and with the approval of the Cabinet, loans authorized by Congress in complete conformity with its provisions.

322 13. To authorize, in the Council of Ministers,

the means necessary for taking the Census of the Republic on the date indicated by the Law or its Ordinance, and then to submit it to the approval of Congress. 14. To authorize, in the Council of Ministers,

the creation and endowment of new public services that might be necessary during the recess of the Legislative Chambers, or the suppression or modification of existing services. 15. To arrange, through the appropriate Minister

and with the approval of the Cabinet, so that the Federal Public Ministry may prosecute employees that give cause for such prosecution. 16. To appoint and remove, through the appro-

priate minister, national employees whose appointment is not assigned to any other official. 17. To call Congress into extraordinary session

with the approval of the Council of Ministers whenever demanded by the gravity of some situation. 18. To declare war, in the name of the Republic,

whenever such has been decreed by Congress. 19. To administer, through the appropriate min-

ister, the National Revenues in conformity with this Constitution and the Laws. 20. To direct, by means of the Secretary of

Foreign Relations, diplomatic negotiations and to negotiate, by means of Plenipotentiaries that he may select.

323 and with the approval of the Council of Ministers, all kinds of Treaties with other nations, submitting them, within a period set by law, to the Legislative Chambers, for their approval or disapproval. In International Treaties the following sentence shall be stipulated: "All differences between the High Contracting Parties, relative to the interpretation or execution of this Treaty, shall be decided by peaceful means recognized by International Law." 21. To negotiate, through the Minister or Minis-

ters concerned and with the approval of the Council of the same, contracts of national interest permitted by this Constitution and the Laws, and submit them to Congress. 22. To prohibit whenever he considers it exped-

ient to do so, the entrance of foreigners into the national territory or to expel them in cases permitted by International Law or provided for by this Constitution and the Laws of the Republic. 23. To decree the restriction or suspension of

guarantees in cases provided for in Article 36, and in case of civil or international war he shall have the power besides, for the duration of such wars: a) To request of and grant to the States aid necessary for the defense of the nation or of its institutions. b) To indicate the place to which are to be

transferred temporarily all or any part of the Powers of

324 the Federation, whenever there shall exist any serious cause for such. c) To arrange for legal proceedings, in case of treason to the country, against Venezuelans who in any manner have been hostile to the national defense or who have voluntarily caused injury to the interest of the Nation. d) To reorganize States that have been dominated by rebellious forces or whose Governments themselves have participated in the rebellion. e) To issue letters of marque and to authorize reprisals. 24. To declare himself on official visit together

with all or any of the Cabinet Officers, to the State or States of the Union or Federal Territories named in the declaration. During the official visit, the seat of the Federal Executive Power shall be the place in which the President Is to be found. The same Decree in which the visit is authorized shall arrange for everything concerning the Transaction, in Caracas, of current administrative affairs. 25. To use the armed forces to end armed struggles

between two or more States, whenever the interposition of his good offices has proven to be insufficient. 26. To exercise, with respect to the States,func-

tions that they delegate to him in their respective Constitutions •

325 27. 28. To grant pardons. To decree, In the Council of Ministers, Addi-

tional Credits to the Budget of Expenditures, whenever such is necessary, because of the insufficiency of lthe amount fixed to the respective chapter in the Law of the General Budget of Revenue and Expenditures, or because the expenditure has not been foreseen, and always provided there are funds in the National Treasury to cover the Additional Credit, without endangering ordinary expenses, which shall be preferred to extraordinary expenses. The allotment of the Credit expended shall be specified. 29. (*) To decree in the Council of Ministers provisions necessary for the attainment of the object referred to in the last sentence of paragraph 2 of Article 32 in conformity with the authorization given by Congress. 30. (*) To exercise the authority conferred by the last sentence of paragraph 6 of Article 32 of this Constitution. 31. To cause to be issued, by the proper Minister,

commissions of navigation to national boats according to Laws. Article 101. The President of the Republic shall present every year to Congress, within the first ten days of its ordinary session, personally, or through one of the Ministers, a Message in which he shall give account of his administration and of the State of the Republic. In the last year of the presidential term, the Message shall be presented on the nineteenth of April, and

326 If the Legislative Chambers have not yet convened, the outgoing President shall present It the first day on which they do convene. Article 102. The President of the Republic is jointly responsible with the Cabinet Officers for the acts of his administration, besides the personal responsibility applicable to him for treason to the Country and for common crimes. Article 103. The President of the Republic shall remain in office from the date of taking the oath of office, until the nineteenth of April of the year in which the respective term ends; but until the President-elect takes office, he shall continue to exercise the Presidential duties with the title of Holder of the Federal Executive Power with the same duties and responsibilities that the President of the Republic has in accordance with this Constitution and the Laws. FOURTH SECTION Cabinet Ministers Article 104. The President of the United State of Venezuela shall exercise the duties given him by this Constitution, through Ministers indicated by Law, which shall determine their authority and duties and serve as a basis for organizing their Departments.

327. Article 105. The Ministers are the sole distinct legal organs of the President of the Republic. All his decrees shall be countersigned, under penalty of being declared null, by the Minister or Ministers, whose departments are concerned, except the Decree of the appointment of the same, and they shall promulgate the measures and rules ordered by the President, within his authority. With regard to the administration of the Federal District the legal organ of the President shall be the Governor, freely chosen or removed by him, in accordance with section 6, Article 100, of this Constitution. Article 106. To be named a Cabinet Minister one must be a natural born Venezuelan, over thirty years of age, of secular status, and in possession of all civil and political rights. Article 107. The President of the Republic shall convoke the Council of Ministers whenever the matter under discussion requires it or whenever he deems it advisable. Article 108. All acts of the Ministers must be in conformity with this Constitution and with the Laws; and their personal responsibility is not lessened by order of the President, although they receive it In writing. Said res-

ponsibility is jointly applicable to all Ministers that have voted affirmatively with regard to acts decided in Cabinet meeting.

328 . Article 109* The Ministers shall render an account to

Congress, each year, within the first ten days of their sessions, in itemized documented reports, of what they have done and what they believe to be proper to do in their respective departments. They shall give an account of the funds administered by them. The Secretary of the Treasury, within the first thirty days of the convening of the Legislative Chambers, shall present to them the Plan for the General Budget of Revenues and Expenses, which he shall prepare in consultation with the other Cabinet Officers, together with his corresponding Exposition of Motives. In the last year of the constitutional term the Ministers shall present their Reports and Accounts on the nineteenth of April, and If the Legislative Chambers have not yet convened they shall leave them with the President of the Federal Court of Appeals so that the latter may remit them to Congress when it convenes. Article 110. The Ministers have the right to speak in the Chambers and they shall be obliged to attend whenever they are called for information. Article 111. Ministers are criminally and civilly responsible for illicit actions in which they take part.

329 TITLE VII Federal Public Ministry Article 112. (*) The Federal Public Ministry is the organ of the Federal Executive to the Federal Judiciary and before the Courts of the States, whenever it is necessary to deal with them in conformity with this Constitution and the Laws. Article 113. (*) The Federal Public Ministry shall be in charge of an official with the title of Attorney General of the Nation, who must be a natural-born Venezuelan, of secular status, over thirty years of age, a lawyer of the Republic, and In possession of his civil and political rights. Article 114. (*) The Attorney General of the Nation shall be appointed by the National Congress within the first thirty days of its session, in the year in which the respective constitutional term begins, and he shall remain in office for the entire term. To replace him in case

of temporary or real absence, Congress, in the same act in which he is appointed, shall elect also five substitutes by number who 3hall meet the same conditions as are required for the Incumbent, and they shall be called In order of election by the Federal Executive, to occupy the vacant office.

330 Article 115. (*) The Attorney General of the Nation, for the service of his office shall have under his direction one or more lawyers freely chosen by him, just as are the other employees under his direction. Article 116. (*) The duties of the Attorney General are: 1. To a33ure, personally or through the officials under his direction, in cases and in the form directed by Law, that in Federal, State, and Municipal Courts, the Laws shall be correctly applied in penal cases and in all those in which the National Treasury, the public order, or good customs are concerned. 2. To give legal advice when requested either

by the National Legislative Chambers, by the President of the Republic, by Officials of the Cabinet, or by the Federal Court of Appeals. 3. To prosecute, personally or through the offi-

cials under his direction, officially or at the request of the Federal Executive, Federal employees, who give cause for prosecution. 4. To act as prosecutor, before the Federal Court

of Appeals in cases referred to in sections 1, 2, and 3 of Article 123. 5. To represent and sustain the rights of the

Nation in cases in which the Nation might be a party, in conformity with instructions issued by the Federal Executive. 6. To carry out other duties as Indicated by law.

331 • Article 117. (*) The Attorney General of the Nation and his substitutes are responsible In the same manner as Cabinet Officers. TITLE VIII The Judicial Power FIRST SECTION Basic Provisions Article 118. (*) The Judicial Power of the Republic r e sides in the Federal Court of Appeals and in the other Courts and Tribunals established by Law. Article 119. (*) All Federal Judges shall be appointed for the Constitutional term, during which they may not be removed from their duties, except in cases determined by law. Article 1 2 0 . (*) Officials of the Judiciary are responsible in conformity with the Law. SECOND SECTION The Federal Court of Appeals Article 121. (*) The Federal Court of Appeals shall be composed of seven Members, who must be natural-born Venezuelans, over thirty years of age, and lawyers of the Republic; and they shall hold office for five years, but at the expiration of this term they shall continue in office until their successors take office.

332. The Court shall sit in Divisions as determined by Law, which shall fix the number of members with which each Division may function. Article 122. (*) The Members of the Federal Court of Appeals, shall be elected by Congress within fifteen days following its convening, singly, and those obtaining at least a majority of the votes shall be elected. In the

same manner, and in the same session, shall be elected in order, seven Substitute Members who, in order of election, shall fill permanent vacancies of the principals. Temporary vacancies and those occasioned by a special situation, shall be provided for as indicated by Law. Whenever the list of Substitutes shall be incomplete, Congress shall complete it, and those selected shall be last on the list. If the Substitutes decline to fill a definite vacancy, the same procedure shall be followed as in the case of a temporary or peculiar vacancy. Article 123. The duties of the Federal Court of Appeals are: 1. To hear charges against the President of the Republic or the one who is occupying his office, Cabinet Officers, the Attorney General of the Nation, the Governor of the Federal District and against its own members, in cases in which said officials incur penal responsibility. 2. To try charges against the Presidents of the

States and other high officials of the States, as Indicated

332
by state laws, and against Governors of the Pederal Territories. 3. To try civil or criminal cases against dip-

lomatic employees in cases permitted by International Law. 4. To try penal cases for non-fulfillment of duty against Diplomatic Agents of the Republic. 5. To hear appeals and to try other cases, the jurisdiction over which is granted to it by Law, in the form and within the limits determined by Law. 6. 7. To try cases of seizure. To adjust controversies of any nature that ar-

ise between officials of the political order of different States; between one or more States, between these and the Federal District, and between national Courts and officials, in matters that fall under the jurisdiction of the Court. 8. (*) To adjust differences that arise between employees or officials of the Judiciary of different States; between state and federal judiciary, and between those of a state or of the Pederal District; provided that there does not exist or the Law does not designate any other authority to adjust them. 9. To declare invalid National, State, or Munici-

pal Laws, when they are not in accord with the Constitution of the Republic. The invalidity shall be restricted to the paragraph, article, or articles In which the incompatibility appears, except when these are of such importance, by their connection with others that, in the opinion of the ' Court, their invalidity causes the nullity of the entire Law.

334
10. To declare which law must prevail when national Laws conflict, or when these conflict with those of the States; and to declare likewise which article or articles of a law are to govern when there are conflicts between Its provisions. 11. To declare Invalid acts of the Legislative

Chambers or of the Federal Executive when they violate rights guaranteed to the States or threaten their autonomy; also acts of the Legislative Assemblies and of the Municipal Councils that violate the restrictions listed In paragraph 4, number 4, of Article 17 and In number 3 of Article 18; and, in general, to declare void all acts of the Public Power that contravene this Constitution.

Likewise the Court shall declare void acts referred to in Article 42, of the Constitution, provided that whenever act3 of the authorities are involved, the said acts shall emanate from national authority or from the Federal District, from the Presidents or high officials of the States, and from Governors of the Federal Territories. A decision declaring void the right to petition for a declaration of the invalidity of an administrative act for illegality or for abuse of power, lapses after three months, provided that the said act has violated none of the principles, guarantees, or rights set forth in this Constitution. The illegality of the same act as

an exception, may always be opposed.

335 ^
Should the act nullified be a ministerial Decision, the Court shall render its decision only in accordance with the procedure set forth in the following number. 12. To judge all controversial questions that

arise between the nation and invididuals, in consequence of or on the occasion of contracts made by the Federal Executive, or of mineral concessions, or of unappropriated lands; except those points, that, by the law in force at the time of the making of the contract, of the granting of the concessions or of the refusal to grant it, shall be subject to the decision of the Federal Executive without judicial recourse. 13. To decide to what extent decisions of foreign

courts shall be enforced in accordance with law. 14. To judge, in all controversial questions,

suits brought against the Nation for damages and injuries, and other suits that are brought against the Nation for monetary claims. 15. To adjust controversies within limits between

different Federal Entities. 16. Other duties that are attributed to it by

this Constitution and the Laws on subjects under Federal jurisdiction. Article 124. (*) In cases provided for in numbers 1 and 2 of the preceding article, the Court shall summarily declare whether there is or is not reason for prosecution under the terms of the bonds produced or of those that it

336
orders forfeited. If it declares in favor of a trial,

during the trial the official accused shall be suspended from office; if against a trial, all procedure shall cease. When the crime is a common one, the trial shall pass on to the regular Tribunal; and when it is of a political nature, the Court shall continue trial till a definite decision is reached. Article 125. The Federal Court of Appeals shall present each year to the National Congress a Report of its work, in which it shall indicate also reforms that in its opinion should be introduced into legislation. TITLE DC Amendments to the Constitution Article 126. (*) This Constitution may be changed by total or partial amendments; but both must be passed by the National Congress, in its ordinary sessions, and only when petitioned by three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States convened in ordinary sessions. Amendments and additions shall be introduced only when the majority of the States concur. Article 127. (*) Amendments or additions to the Constitution shall be passed in the same manner as prescribed for ratifying Laws. Article 128, (*) when the amendment or addition is passed by the National Congress, its President shall submit it • *

337*
to the Legislative Assemblies for their ratification. Article 129. Congress may also in either one of the Chambers take the initiative in partial or total amendments and pass them by the procedure indicated in the two preceding articles, which shall be considered as sanctioned on being ratified by two-thirds of the Legislative Assemblies of the States in their ordinary sessions. Article 130. Although either the Legislative Assemblies of the States or the National Congress may initiate amendments, reports of the votes of the States must be returned to Congress, which must canvass the votes. Article 131. If, as a result of this count, the amendment or addition has been legally ratified by the Legislative Assemblies of the States, the Constitution thus amended or changed, shall be in force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the United States ef Venezuela. Article 132. (*) Terms of public offices which exceed five years, according to the Constitution of the ninth of July, 1931* are reduced to the aforementioned term of five years, counting from the nineteenth of April, 1936, as fixed by the present Constitution. Article 133. (*) The appointment of the Attorney General of the Nation by the National Congress under this Const!-

333
tution shall be made, for the first time, together with the appointments of the respective substitutes, upon the promulgation of this Constitution, and he shall remain in office for the entire Constitutional term. Pinal Disposition Article 134. The Constitution of the seventh of July, 1931 put in force by the Executive Power and published in the Official Journal of the United States of Venezuela on the ninth of July of the same year is repealed. (New Articles 137-139 inserted.) Given in the Federal Legislative Building, in Caracas, on the sixteenth day of the month of July nineteen hundred and thirty six—127th year of the Independence and 78th year of the Federation. President of the Senate, Senator for the State of Merida, (L.S.) Pedro Maria Parra. President of the Chamber of Deputies, Deputy for the State of Trujillo, L. A. Cells Paredes. First Vice-President of the Senate, Senator for the State of Nueva Esparta, Jesus R. Risquez First Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies, Deputy for the State of Anzoategui, M. F. Nunez

339
Second Vice-President of the Senate, Senator for the State of Yaracuy, Pedro N. Pereira Second Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies, Deputy for the State of Bolivar, L. P. Vargas Plzarro (Here follow the signatures of the Senators and Deputies of the Congress, In alphabetical order of States). Federal Legislative Building at Caracas, the 20th day of July, 1936-127th year of Independence and 78th of the Federation, E. Lopez Contreras Countersigned: (Follow the signatures of all the Ministers.)

