Constitution of the United States of Venezuela
Caracas, June 13, 1914.
TITLE 1. The Nation.
Section 1.Concerning Territory
ART. 1. The territory of Venezuela includes all that which before the political transformation of 1810 was called the
Captaincy-General of Venezuela, with the modifications resulting from public Treaties, and the territories of the States and that of the Federal District, and that of the Federal territories, Amazones and Delta Amacuro, and that of the Venezuelan islands in the Caribbean Sea.
2. The general boundaries of each State are those which they now have, and they shall be determined by those laid down by the Law of 28th April, 1856, for the old provinces, except the modifications established in the Constitution adopted by the National Congress on the Ith August, 1909, which was ordered to be put into effect on the 5th August of the same year, and the modifications established by the Protocol concluded at Maracay, the 31st January, 1917, by the Plenipotentiaries of the States of Aragua and Carabobo, and approved by their respective Legislative Assemblies under date of the 27th February and the 2nd March, 1917.
3. Pending controversies between the States, on account of  heir boundaries and those which may arise in future from the same reason, shall be subinitted by the Senate upon petition of one or more of the respective States, for its decision to a Tribunal of Arbitrators, to be freely named by the Federal Executive.
4. The Federal District, which shall be organized by a special law, shall be composed of the city of Caracas, together with its outlying parishes, El Jecreo, El Valle, Ea Vega, Antimano, Macarao, Macuto, and the department of Vargas. 5. The Federal territories, Amazonas and Delta Amacuro, which shall be organized by a special law, can opt to become States, provided always that they comply with the following conditions:
(1.) That they have at least the population required for the election of a deputy, in accordance with this Constitution.
(2.) That they establish to the satisfaction of Congress that they are able to maintain the public service in all its branches and to defray the expenses necessary for this purpose. 
Sole Paragraph.The islands belonging to the Venezuelan Union in the Caribbean Sea shall be subordinated directly to the Federal Executive, with regard to their government and administration, until they become populated and may constitute one or more territories.
6. The seat of the general authorities of the Union is the city of Caracas, capital of the United States of Venezuela, but the executive power may fix its residence temporarily at any other point in the Federal District whenever unforeseen circumstances require it.
7. The territory of the nation cannot be alienated, nor leased nor ceded in any way whatsoever to a foreign Power.

Section 2. Concerning Venezuelans.
8. The Venezuelan nation is the reunion of all Venezuelans under the same pact of political associations by the name of the United States of Venezuela.
9. The Venezuelan nation is for always and irrevocably free and independent of every foreign Power or domination, and in no case and by no act can an authority, Congress, or power change the form of government, which is and shall be republican, federal, democratic, elective, representative, responsible, and alternative.
10. The Venezuelan nationality is acquired by birth or by adoption.
(a). Venezuelans by birth are
(i.) All those born in the territory of Venezuela.
(ii.) The children of Venezuelan parents whatever their place of birth.
(b.) The following- acquire Venezuelan nationality:
(1.) Children of full age of a Venezuelan father or mother by naturalization, born outside of the territory of the Republic, if they afterwards take up their residence in the country and manifest their desire to be Venezuelans.
(2.) All persons born or who may hereafter be born in Spanish-American countries, provided that they have established their residences in the territory of the Republic and manifested their desire to be Venezuelans.
(3.) Foreigners who may have obtained certificates of naturalization in conformity with the law.
(4.) All foreign women, married to Venezuelans, so long as a matrimonial bond exists or after this bond is dissolved, if they shall have complied with the provisions of the following Article within the year following such dissolution.
11. The declaration of intention to become a Venezuelan must be made before the principal Registrar of the jurisdiction in which the person making such declaration establishes his domicile, and the latter, upon receiving it, shall record it in the proper record and shall send a copy thereof to the Federal Executive for its publication in the Official Gazette.
Sole Paragraph. Naturalization shall not be considered to be acquired until the Executive orders and completes the publication above referred to.
12. Venezuelans over 21 years of age, who fulfil the conditions required by this Constitution, are electors and eligible to office.
13. All Venezuelans are obliged to serve the nation in conformity with the requirements of the laws.

14. Venezuelans shall enjoy, throughout the entire territory of the Union, equal rights and shall be subject to equal obligations without other conditions than those established in this Constitution and the laws.
Section 3.Concerning Foreigners.
15. The rights and duties of foreigners are fixed by law, but can in no case be greater than those of Venezuelans.
16. Foreigners, domiciled or transient, who shall lake part in any political controversies, shall be subject to the same responsibilities as Venezuelans and to the provisions of paragraph 20, Article 71, of this Constitution.
 17. In no case can nationals or foreigners claim that the nation or the States shall indemnify them for damages, injuries, or expropriations which shall not have been effected by legitimate authorities, operating within the scope of their public capacity.
18. The Government of Venezuela shall not conclude Treaties with other nations entrenching upon the principles established in the two foregoing Articles.
TITLE II.Basis of the Union.
19.  The States of Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Bolivar, Carabubo, Cojedes, Falcon, Huarico. Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas, Nueve Esparts, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaranay, Zamora, and Zulia, which form the Venezuelan Union, reciprocally recognize their autonomy, they declare themselves equal in political entity: they conserve in its entirety the sovereignty not delegated by this Constitution, and they bind themselves to defend themselves against every violence that may injure, theirindependence and the integrity of the Union, and to establish
their internal rule and government upon the following fundamental basis:
(1.) To preserve the national Flag and coat of arms of Venezuela, in conformity with the laws applicable thereto.
(2.) To organize themselves in conformity with the principles of popular, elective, federal, representative, responsible, and alternative Government, and to elaborate their Constitutions in conformity with the principles of this fundamental pact.
(3.) To fulfil and to cause to be fulfilled and executed the Constitution and the laws of the Union, and the decrees, orders, and resolutions which the Federal Powers may issue in the exercise of their legal attributes and powers.
(4) To recognize in their respective Constitutions the municipal autonomy of the districts and their independence
of the political power of the State in all that concerns their economic and administrative rule: in consequence the District Councils may establish their financial systems, subjecting the same to the provisions of Articles 10, 11, 12 and 13, Article 22 up to the first paragraph of the loth guarantee, and Article 117 of this Constitution.
In cases of internal or external war, the executive power of the State shall also assume the administration of the districts within its jurisdiction in so far as concern its economic and fiscal affairs, with the assent of its Legislative Assembly, and, if this be not in session, then with the assent of its Supreme Court.
(5.) Not to alienate to a foreign Power any part of their territory, nor to ask its protection, nor to establish or cultivate
political or diplomatic relations with other nations.
(6.) Not to associate or ally itself with another nation, nor to separate from Venezuela.
(7.) To cede to the Government of the Federation the territory necessary for the erection of forts, aerodomes, wharves, warehouses, naval yards, penitentiaries, ways of communication, quarantine stations, national buildings, and other works indispensable for the general administration.
(8.) To allow to the Federal Executive the free administration of the territories of Amazones and Delta Amaouib, which shall have the option of becoming States when they have fulfilled the conditions laid down in Article 5 of this Constitution.
(9.) To reserve to the Federal Power all legislative and executive jurisdiction concerning (a) mails, telegraphs, and
telephones; (b) aerial, maritime, coastwise and fluvial navigation, and concerning wharves and national highways, without the power to restrict by imposts or navigation privileges the rivers and other navigable waters which have not required any special works in order to be made navigable. National highways are those which cross a State or territory or the Federal district, and pass beyond its boundaries.
Sole Paragraph. The Federal Authority is empowered to issue the legislative and executive provisions regulating the traffic of vehicles of mechanical traction over the said highways.
(10.) Not to establish custom-houses for the collection of imposts, since there shall only be national customs dues, and not to impose contributions upon products destined for exportation.
(11.) Not to establish imposts upon cattle, products, effects, or any other class of merchandise, domestic or foreign, before they are offered for consumption.
(12.) Not to prohibit the consumption of cattle, manufactures, and other products of other States, nor their transit, nor to burden the latter with greater or less imposts than such as their own similar products pay in the locality whence the former come.
(13.) Not to create imposts the enforcement of which would require the co-operation of the fiscal administration of the nation.
(14.) To reserve to each State the right of disposing ofits natural products in the manner established in clause 27 of this Article.
(15.) To give entire faith to the public acts and judicial procedure of the other States, of the Federal district, and of the Federal territories, and to cause them to be fulfilled and executed.
(16) To organize their Tribunals and courts for the administration of justice, and to have the same substantive civil, mercantile, and penal legislation, and the same procedure.
(17.) To reserve to the nation the right of legislating concerning health and public instruction, and to establish schools of primary, obligatory, and free instruction, and free schools of arts and trades.
(18.) To assist in the formation of the Federal Court of Cassation, in the manner prescribed by this Constitution.
(19) To submit to the decisions of the Federal Court of Cassation as the Supreme Federal Tribunal of the States.
(20.) To adopt the system of direct voting for the election of Municipal Councils, Legislative Assemblies, and Chambers of Deputies: and for the election of their other functionaries of popular election, the indirect vote or vote by delegation; in both cases the vote to be secret and to have as a basis the electoral census, pursuant to the Federal law on the subject.
(21.) Not to impose upon the employees of the Federal power duties which are incompatible with the national public service.
(22.) To furnish the proportional unarmed contingent in order to make up the national public force, in accordance with the provisions of law.
(23.) Not to permit in their territory recruitings or levies which might have as an object an attack on liberty ur independence, or the disturbance of the public order of the nation or of other States or of another nation.
(24.) In no case to declare or make war, and lo preserve strict neutrality in nil controversies arising between other states.
(25.) To refer and submit to the decision of the Federal Court of Cassation, as the Supreme Federal Tribunal, in all controversies arising- between two or more States when they cannot by themselves and by specific measures arrive at a settlement. If for any reason, in case of a resort to arbitration, they do not designate the Arbitrator to whose decision they submit, the controversy shall be submitted to the Federal Court of Cassation. Controversies relative to boundaries are excepted, and these shall be decided in conformity with the provisions of Article 3 of this onstitution.
(26.) To acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Cassation to hear and decide the cases which, on account of treason to the country or the infraction of the Constitution and general laws of the Republic, are brought against those exercising the executive authority of the States, who shall be obliged to put this provision ill their Constitutions, in such cases the procedure laid down by the national laws shall be followed.
(27.) To retain as their own revenue
(a.) The products of the contributions collected under the name of territorial Impost in all the custom-houses of the Republic.
 (b) The total product of mines, waste lands, and salines.
(c.) The proportional share of the liquor revenue ascribed to them by law. 
(d) The revenue accruing from taxes on their natural products.
(e.) The revenue accruing from stamped paper, in accordance with the laws relating thereto.
(28.) To delegate to the Congress of the Union the authority to establish and organize the revenue dealt with in numbers (a), (b), and (c) of the preceding clause 27, and to cede to the nation the administration of this revenue in order to ensure the distributionof its net proceeds among all the States proportionally tothe number of their inhabitants.
Sole Paragraph, Waste lands may be alienated in conformity with the law; there are excepted therefrom the waste landsexisting in the maritime, fluvial, or lacustrine islands, of which the Federal Executive shall take advantage iu a manner that shall not involve, directly or indirectly, the transfer of the dominion or ownership of the land.
(29) To maintain, at a distance from their boundaries, individuals who tor political reasons are taking- refuge in a State, provided always that the State interested requests this on grounds justified in the judgment of the State giving the asylum.
(30.) Not to coin money, nor for any reason to issue paper money.
20. Two or more of the political entities enumerated in Article 19 reserve to themselves the right of joining together
in order to form a single State, but they shall always preserve the liberty of regaining their character of a State. In either case the Federal Executive, National Congress, and other States of the Union shall be informed.
21. The States which exercise the right conferred upon them by the foregoing Article shall retain the rights set out in Articles 39 and 95 of this Constitution for the election of Senators and the presentation of Magistrates of the Federal Court of Cassation.
TITI.E III. Guarantees to Venezuelans.
22. The nation guarantees to Venezuelans
(1.) Inviolability of life; capital punishment being abolished, whatever may be the law establishing it or the authority ordering it.
(2.) Property, with all its attributes, rights, and privileges, which shall only be subject to contributions decreed by the Legislative authority, to judicial decision, to sanitary measures in conformity with the law, and to be taken for works of public utility after due judicial decision and indemnity as the law may provide.
(3.) Inviolability of postal and telegraphic correspondence and other private papery which cannot lie t'iilc«vn except liy order of the competent judicial authority and under the formalities provided by the laws, secrecy being always preserved regarding domestic and private matters.
(4.) The inviolability of the domicile, which cannot be forcibly entered except to prevent the perpetration or consummation of crime, to enforce judicial decisions in criminal proceedings or for sanitary purposes, and in such cases this must be effected as regulated by law or for reasons of sanitation, and even this must be carried out in conformity with the laws.
(5.) Personal liberty, and in consequence
(a) Compulsory recruiting for military service, which must be rendered in conformity with the dispositions of the law is abolished.
(b) Slavery remains for ever forbidden.
(c.) Slaves who enter upon Venezuelan territory are free.
(d) All persons have the right to do or execute that which does not prejudice another.
(e) No one is obliged to do that which the law does not order, nor is he prevented from doing that which it does not prohibit.
(6) Freedom of thought expressed by word of mouth through the press. In cases of calumny, defamation, injury, or damage to a third party, the person injured shall have a right of action before the competent Tribunals of Justice in conformity with the laws, but the accused party may give bond in lieu of imprisonment to answer the charge until an adverse final judgment has been given against him.
(7.) Liberty to travel without passport, and to change domicile, provided that the legal formalities are duly observed, and to leave the Republic and to return thereto, taking and transporting their goods.
(8.) Freedom of industry, subject to the prohibitions and limitations which public order and good customs demand, therefore, the privilege of monopolies is abolished, and the law shall authorize only a temporary privilege for intellectual property, patents of inventions, trade-marks, and for the construction of means of communication, not guaranteed nor subsidized by the nation or by the States.
(9.) Freedom of assemblage without arms, publicly or privately, without the authorities being able to exercise any act in prevention thereof, and the liberty of association, with the exceptions provided by the Laws of the 23rd February, 1807 and of the 5th May, 1871.
(10.) Freedom of petition. This may be exercised before any authority, functionary, or corporation, who are obliged to give a prompt decision. If the petition be on behalf of several persons, the first live must answer for the authenticity of the signatures and all for the truth of the facts.
(11.) Freedom of suffrage, without other restrictions than those established by this Constitution and the laws.
(12.) Liberty of teaching.
(13.) Religious liberty in accordance with the law and under the supreme inspection of every sect by the Federal Executive.
(14.) Individual security, and in consequence
(a.) No Venezuelan shall be imprisoned or arrested for a debt which has not been incurred by fraud or crime.
(b.) Nor can he be judged by special Tribunals or Commissions, but only by his regular Judges and in virtue of
pre-existing laws.
(c.) Nor can he be imprisoned or detained except upon a summary decision that he has committed a punishable crime, and on the written order of the functionary who orders the imprisonment, setting out the reason therefore, unless he be taken in flagrante delicto. His detention on such order can in no case be prolonged for more than thirty days after his arrest.
(d) Nor can he be deprived of the right of communicating with his fellows for any reason or pretext.
(e.) Nor can he be obliged to take oath nor to undergo examination in a criminal action against himself, nor against his relations within the fourth degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, nor against his consort.
(f.) Nor to continue in prison, if the cause of his imprisonment be removed.
(g.) Nor be condemned nor suffer punishment in criminal matters, except after having been personally cited and heardin legal form, every infamous punishment being moreover abolished.
(h.) Nor can lie be condemned to personal punishment for more than twenty years.
(i.) Nor can he be tried a second time for the same offence.
(15.) Equality, in virtue whereof
(a.) All must be judged by the same laws and subjected to like duties, services, and contributions.
(b.) No titles of nobility, hereditary honours or distinctions, nor employments or services, the salaries or emoluments whereof shall endure for more time than the service, shall be granted.
(c.) No official address shall be used other than "Citizen" and "you."
23. The preceding enumeration of rights must not be understood as the denial of any others which may belong to citizens and which are not included in this title.
24. The rights of citizens are suspended
(1.) By assuming an obligation to take service against Venezuela.
(2.) By conviction or punishment which carries with it interdiction or disability to exercise public office or political
rights while such punishment is being served.
(3.) By accepting, while in Government employ, gratuities, offices, honours, or recompense from foreign Governments unless the requisite authorization of the Senate shall have been given previously.
(4) By judicial decree of inhibition. 
25. Those persons who issue, sign, execute, or order to be executed, decrees, orders, or resolutions which violate any of the rights guaranteed to Venezuelans are culpable and shall he punished in conformity with the law.
26. The rights recognized and sanctioned in the preceding Articles shall not be diminished nor infringed by the laws which regulate their exercise, and laws which do so shall be declared, in conformity with paragraph 10, Article .18, unconstitutional and void.
TITLE IV.-Concerning Sovereignty and Public Power-.
27. The sovereignty remains vested in the people, who exercise it by means of the public powers.
28. The definition of the attributes and faculties lays down the limits of public power; everything which exceeds the said definition constitutes a usurpation of authority.
29. All usurped authority is ineffective and its acts are void.
30. All decisions rendered by the direct or indirect application of force or of a popular meeting in rebellion is null and void.
31. The exercise of public power involves individual responsibility for excess of the authority granted by the Constitution or for the infringement of the law which defines its functions in the terms establishing this Constitution.
82. The public power is distributed between the Federal power and the power of the States within the limits established in this Constitution.
33. The Federal power is divided into Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.
TITI.V: V.Concerning Legislative, Power.
Section 1.Concerning Congress.
34. The Legislative power is exercised by an Assembly which is called " Congress of the United States of Venezuela," composed of two Chambers, one of deputies and the other of senators.
Section 2.Concerning Chamber of Deputies.
35. In order to form the Chamber of Deputies, each State shall elect by direct vole and in conformity with its election law one for every 35,000 inhabitants and one more for an excess of 15,000. The State whose population does not reach 35,000 inhabitants shall elect one deputy. In the same manner it shall name substitutes in number equal to that of the principals to replace the former, in the order of their election, as vacancies occur.
Sole Paragraph.The deputies shall hold office for three years and shall be renewed as a whole.
36. In order lo be elected deputy it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, and to have completed 21 years of age.
37. The Federal district and the Federal territories which Possess, or shall possess, the basis of population established in Article 35 shall also elect their deputies by direct vote and with the formalities established by law.
Sole Paragraph.In the basis of population the aborigines who live in a state of savagery shall not be computed.
38. The following- are the attributes of the Chamber of Deputies:
(1.) To pass votes of censure upon the Ministers of the Cabinet, who shall ipso facto cease to hold office;
(2.) To elect every three years, within the first fifteen clays of their meeting, a Prosecutor-General of the nation and two substitutes by an absolute majority of votes and in successive ballots. Those elected shall take the legal oath before the federal Court of Cassation in order to enter upon the exercise of their duties; and
(3.) Such others as the laws prescribe. 
Section 3.Concerning the Chamber of Senate
39. In order to form this Chamber, the Legislative Assembly of each State shall elect, from persons outside of their number, two principal senators and two substitutes to supply the absence of the former in the order of their election. Sole Paragraph,The senators shall hold office for three years, and shall be renewed in their entirety. 4
40. In order to be a senator it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth and to have completed 30 years of age.
41. The following are the attributes of the Senate:
(1) To submit to unrestricted arbitrators, in accordance with Article 8 of this Constitution, the controversies which one or more States of the Union may raise with respect to their boundaries.
(2.) To grant to illustrious Venezuelans, twenty-five years after their death, the honour of having their remains deposited in the National Pantheon.
(3.) To give or withhold their consent to the acceptance by national employees of gifts, offices, honours, or recompense from foreign nations.
(4.) To give or withhold their consent to the promotion of military officials from the rank of colonel and naval officials from the rank of captain of a vessel inclusively.
(5.) Such others as the laws proscribe.
Section 4.Provisions Common in both Chambers.
42. The Legislative Chambers shall meet every year at the capital of the Union on the 19th April, or as soon as possible thereafter, without the necessity of being previously convoked, and d shall close their sessions on the 5th day of the following July, without right of prorogation.
43. The Chambers shall open their sessions with at least two-thirds of their members, and in default of this number those present shall meet' as a Preparatory Committee, and shall order the measures which they deem expedient for the attendance of the absentees.
44. The sessions once opened may continue with the attendance of the absolute majority of the whole number of members.
45. The sessions shall be public, but may be secret when the Chamber so decides.
46. The Chambers have the right
(1.) To establish their respective internal organizations and rules of debates, and to order the punishment of those who infringe them;
(2.) To organize the police of the building where they hold their sessions;
(3.) To reprimand or correct spectators who may disregard the established rules;
(4.) To remove obstacles that are opposed to the legalexercise of their functions;
(5.) To order the execution of their special resolutions; and
(6.) To confirm their members and to receive their resignations.
47. The Chambers shall sit in the same town, they shall open and close their sessions upon the same day, and neither of the two may suspend them nor remove their residence without the consent of the other. In case of disagreement, they shall assemble in Congress and execute the decision come to.
48. The exercise of any public, office is incompatible during the sessions with that of either senator or deputy. The law shall designate the emoluments which the members of Congress are to receive for their services, and these can be increased only for the ensuing term.
49. The senators and deputies, from thirty days prior to the 19th April until thirty days after the termination of the sessions, shall enjoy immunity, which consists in the suspension of every civil or criminal process, whatever its origin or nature. When any one of them shall have committed an act which merits personal punishment, the investigation shall continue until the termination of the preliminary procedure, and shall then remain suspended while the immunity lasts.
50. Neither Chamber ran in any case punish any of its members because he shall have violated in it the immunity established in the preceding Article. The Magistrates or authorities or corporations and their agents, who deprive a senator or deputy of his liberty whilst he enjoys his immunity, shall be submitted to trial before the competent judicial authority, and they may be accused by any citizen to that end, and they shall by that act itself be removed from their employments without prejudice to the penalties which the law may impose on persons violating the Constitution.
51. The members of the Chambers are not responsible for their vote nor for the opinions expressed therein.
52. The senators and deputies cannot make contracts with the Federal Executive, either for themselves or for others, nor can they advocate before it the claims of others.
53. When in consequence of death or any other cause which may create a permanent vacancy, the substitutes from one State in the Senate are exhausted or reduced to a number less than that to which it is entitled, the respective Legislative Assembly shall fill the vacancy or vacancies that may have occurred for the period that remained to the substitutes or substitute. Witli regard to vacancies occurring in the Chamber of Deputies, the Constitutions of the States and the organic law of the Federal District shall determine the manner of filling them.
Section 5: Concerning the Chambers convened in Congress.
54. The Chambers shall deliberate separately, but they shall meet in Congress when this Constitution or the laws so provide, or when one of the two Chambers deems it necessary. If the Chamber that is invited to meet in joint session accepts, it is for the latter to fix the day and the hour of the meeting. 
55. The acts sanctioned by the Legislative Chambers working separately as co-legislative bodies shall be called "laws," and those sanctioned by them when united in Congress, or when separate on matters pertaining exclusively to each one, shall be called "resolutions.'
56. The Congress shall be presided over by the President of the Senate, and the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall be the Vice-President thereof, and shall fill the place of the former during his temporary absence which may occur during the session.
57. The Chambers assembled in Congress shall have the following attributes:
(1.) To carry out the elections as prescribed by this Constitution and the laws.
(2.) To appoint each year, if they deem it proper end within the first fifteen clays after their installation, a Commander-in chief of the national army, and to determine at the same time his duties.
(3.) To receive the resignation of the President of the Union of Venezuela and of the Vice-presidents.
(4.) To examine the annual Message which the President of the Union may present.
(5.) To examine and approve or disapprove of the reports and the accounts which the Ministers of the Cabinet must present in conformity with Article 89 of this Constitution.
(6.) To raise to the category of States of the Union the Federal territories which may so desire, provided always that they shall comply with the conditions prescribed in Article 5 of this Constitution.
Section 6.Concerning the Attributes Common to both Chambers as Co-Legislative Bodies.
58. The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, operating as co-legislative bodies, have the following attributes: 
(1.) To pass the organic and electoral laws of the Federal District and of the Federal territories. In the Federal District the law shall determine how the municipality shall exercise its powers in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution, so that the liberty of political action of the high Federal powers which reside therein shall not be interfered with.
(2.) To decree the national taxes and to authorize their collection for each fiscal year.
(3.) To sanction the national codes and laws in Accordance with this Constitution.
(4.) To fix the type, value, alloy, weight, and coinage of national money, gold being the monetary standard; and to decide concerning the admission and circulation of foreign money.'
(5.) To create, suppress, and fix the salaries of national officials.
(6.) To determine everything relating to the national debt and the interest thereon.
(7.) To decree loans secured on the credit of the nation. 
(8.) To decree all that relates to statistics, sanitation, military matters, and the national census, which shall be taken every ten years, and shall be approved by the national Congress.
(9.) To approve or disapprove treaties and diplomatic, agreements, which, in the absence of their approval, shall not be valid, and cannot be ratified nor the ratifications exchanged. The approving law passed by Congress shall not receive formal sanction until it is known that the Treaty has been accepted by the other party. Treaties shall not be published officially until they have been ratified and the ratifications exchanged.
(10.) To approve or disapprove
(i.) The titles and concessions of mines and the alienation of waste lands and any other real property of the nation.
(ii.) Concessions for the construction of ways of communication.
(iii.) Other contracts of national interest authorized by this Constitution and the laws which the Federal Executive may conclude or extend.
Without the approval of Congress, the acts to which this number refers are not valid and cannot be put into execution.
(11.) To approve the general budget of public receipts and expenditure.
 (12.) To make laws relative to the exercise of the attributeswhich this Constitution confers on the Federal power, and besides all laws of a general character which may be necessary.
(13.) To fix and to unify national weights and measures, in accordance with the decimal metric system.
(14.) To establish a special method of administration applicable to the Federal territories.
(15.) To establish the increase that may be necessary in the basis of population for the election of deputies in conformity with the last decennial census.
(16.) To permit or prohibit the admission of foreigners into the service of the Republic.
(17.) To make laws concerning civil pensions, retirement allowances, and military bounties.
(18.) To draw up the army ordinances.
(19.) To dictate the law for the formation and replacement of the sea and land forces.
(20.) To declare war and to call upon the Federal Executive to make peace.
(21.) To legislate upon all matters relative to the protection of the ports and sea coast.
Section 7.Concerning the Formation of Laws
59. Laws and decrees may be initiated in either Chamber. The initiative also belongs to the Minister of the respective
Department, but in this case the draft must be published beforehand by the press, and must be presented by the Minister to one of the Chambers.
60. As soon as a project has been presented, it shall be read and considered in order to be introduced; and if it is introduced, it shall be given three discussions, with an interval of one day at least between discussions, the rules established for the debates being observed.
6l. Bills approved in the Chamber in which they have been initiated shall pass to the other for the purposes of the foregoing Article, and if rejected they shall be returned to the Chamber in which they originated, with the alterations, if any, made therein.
62. If. the initiating Chamber does not accept the amendments, it may insist and send its reasons in writing to the other. It may also invite the other to meet in Congress in order to seek a method of agreement, but if this be not reached, the Bill shall remain without effect in case the initiating Chamber resolves sitting alone to maintain its objections.
63. When Bills are sent from one Chamber to another, the days on which they have been discussed shall be stated.
64. Bills rejected during the session of one year cannot be presented anew until the year following.
65. Bills which remain pending in either Chamber at the end of the session shall undergo therein the same three discussions in the session of the following year in the Chamber in which they have not already been discussed
66. In laws the formula used shall be: "The Congress of the United States of Venezuela decrees."
67. A law which amends another shall be drawn as a whole, and shall repeal the former in its entirety.
68. Laws are repealed with the same formalities as those laid down for their enactment.
69. Legislative Acts once sanctioned shall be communicated in duplicate to the President of the Republic, and shall be published in the 'Journal of Debates of the Senate Chamber,' and shall take effect upon compliance with the formalities specified in Article 79 (7) of this Constitution. The President of the Republic, through the channel of the Minister who countersigns them, shall return one of the two copies to Congress with the order for its execution.
Sole Paragraph. In the publication to be made, in the "Diario de Debates" the dates upon which the laws and decrees have been presented to the President of the Republic shall Instated, to the end that once the fifteen days referred to in paragraph 7 of Article 79 have elapsed they may have full force and effect.
70. The power of legislating possessed by Congress cannot be delegated.
71. No legislative disposition shall have a retroactive effect except in matters of judicial procedure and in case of reduction of punishment.
Title VI.Concerning the. Federal Executive Power.
Section 1.Concerning Administration.
72. Every function relative to the general administration of the Union which is not attributed to another authority by this Constitution is within the competency of the Federal Executive, and shall be exercised by a Magistrate, in conjunction with the Ministers of the Cabinet who are his organs, who shall be called President of the United States of Venezuela.
73. The functions of the Federal Executive shall not be exercised outside of the Federal District, except in the cases provided by this Constitution.
Section 2.The Election of the President of the United States of Venezuela.
74. Within the first fifteen days after their installation the Chambers of the Senate and Deputies shall assemble in Congress to proceed to the election of the. President of the United States of Venezuela. On the same date there shall be elected a First and a Second Vice President, who shall act, in the order of election, in case of the absolute inabilitv of the President, as provided in Article 77 of this Constitution.
 75. The session of Congress in which the elections referred to in the previous article must be effected shall be public and permanent; it shall be fixed five days in advance, and notice thereof shall be published by the press.
76. The voting shall be in secret, and the citizens who receive an absolute majority of the votes of the members of Congress present at the election shall be declared elected.
77. Temporary vacancies in the Presidency of the United States of Venezuela shall be filled by the Minister of the Cabinet designated by him. Absolute vacancies shall be filled by the Vice-Presidents in the order of their election, and, failing these, the President of the Federal Court of Cassation shall assume the office and shall proceed immediately to convoke the Congress for the election of a new President and Vice-Presidents, for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Section 3.Concerning the President of the United States of Venezuela.
 78.  The President of the United States of Venezuela must be a Venezuelan by birth, a layman, over 30 years of age, in possession of his civil and political rights. The same conditions are required to be elected Vice-President. 
(1.) The President of the United States of Venezuela and the Vice-Presidents shall take the oath of office before Congress prior to entering upon the exercise of their duties.
(2.) Whenever for any cause it should be impossible to take the oath of office before the National Congress, the officials elect shall do so before the Federal Court of Cassation in full session.
79. The attributes of the President of the United States of Venezuela are:
(1.) To appoint and to remove the Ministers of the Cabinet.
(2.) To receive and extend courtesies to public Ministers of other nations.
(3.) To sign official letters addressed to the Heads of States.
(4.) To administer the Federal Distinct according to law, and to act therein as the highest civil and political authority.
(5.) To administer the Federal territories in conformity with their organic laws.
(6.) To entrust with the exercise of the functions of the Presidency one of the members of the Cabinet, when matters of public interest or reasons of health demand his absence from the capital for more than twenty-five days, or his temporary absence from power. On the cessation of these causes he shall again assume charge of his office, and to that end it shall be sufficient that he should so notify the Minister in charge.
(7.) To order the execution and watch over the fulfilment and executing of this Constitution and the laws and decrees of the national Congress, and to cause them to be published in the "Official Gazette" within the first fifteen days after they have been received, except, in so far as concerns attributes of Article 58.
(8.) To issue the decrees and regulations for the better execution of the laws, taking care not to alter their spirit, intent, or meaning.
(9.) To negotiate loans decreed by Congress in entire conformity with their provisions.
(10.) To regulate the service of sanitation, posts, telegraphs, or telephones, public or private, with the authority to create and suppress stations or federal offices when urgently needed. 
(11.) To dictate the measures necessary for the taking of the census of the Republic every ten years, and to submit it for the approval of Congress.
(12.) To issue navigation licences to national vessels.
(13.) To issue certificates of nationality in conformity with the law.
(14.) To appoint those national officials whose appointment is not attributed to other functionaries, and to create and remunerate such new public services as may be necessary during the recess of the Legislative Chambers.
(l5.) To remove officials at will and to send them to be tried, if there is reason therefor.
(16.) To convoke an extraordinary session of Congress when some serious matter demands it.
(17.) To declare war in the name of the Republic when Congress has decreed it.
(18.) To administer waste lands, mines, salines, and the revenue from alcohol in conformity with this Constitution and with the laws.
(19.) To direct diplomatic negotiations and to conclude all kinds of Treaties with other nations, submitting them to the Legislative Chambers in accordance with paragraph V of Article 58.
(20.) To make contracts of national interests permitted  by the Constitution and by the laws, and to submit them for the approval of the Chambers.
(21.) To prohibit, when he thinks it desirable, the entry of foreigners into national territory or to expel pernicious foreigners not possessing real property in the country who have domicile in the country. If they possess such, expulsion may only be decreed when the value of the real estate shall be less than 40000 bolivares, which fact shall be established by the respective public documents of title.
(22.) (a) To direct hostilities and to command the army and navy in person or appoint someone who shall do so
(b.) To organize the national army and the militia in accordance with the law.
(c.) To fix annually the number of the sea and land forces
(23.) In cases of foreign war or internal disturbance, or armed rebellion against the institutions, he shall, after first
having declared that public order is disturbed, and until peace be established, make use of the following prerogatives:
(a.) To ask of the States the assistance necessary for the defence of the nation or of its institutions.
('b.) To demand contribution in advance,
(c.) To arrest, imprison, or expel from the territory of the Republic natives or foreign individuals who may be opposed to the re-establishment of peace.
(d.) To suspend, in case of international war, those rights the exercise of which may be incompatible with the defence of the country except that relating to the inviolability of life.
In cases of internal war he may make use of the same prerogative throughout the whole country of the Republic 
in those localities in which, in his judgment, it may be necessary, but only until peace is re-established.
(e) To designate the place where the Federal power shall be transferred temporarily when there is a weighty reason
therefor.
(f.) To decree the trial for treason of those Venezuelans who may be in any way hostile to the national defence, or voluntarily cause injury to the interests of the Union.
(g.) To issue letters of marque and to authorize reprisals.
(24.) To dispose of the public forces, in case the use of his good offices proves unavailing, to put a stop to an armed collision between two or more States, and to require them to lay down their arms and to submit the decision of their controversies to the Federal Court, lie shall also exercise this attribute in case of an armed rebellion in any of the States of the Union, after having exhausted all pacific and conciliatory means for establishing peace and public order.
25. To grant amnesties and pardons.
Sole Paragraph.The attributes and prerogatives enumerated in paragraphs 22, 23, 24, and 25 shall be exercised in accordance with what Congress may determine when it makes use of paragraph 2, Article 57, of this Constitution.
80. The President of the Union is under the obligation of presenting to Congress, personally or through one of his Ministers, within the first ten days of the ordinary sessions, a comprehensive message in which he shall give account of his administrative and political acts, report upon the state of the Republic, and indicate the improvements which it would be advantageous to adopt in the existing legislation.
81. The law shall fix the salary which the President of the Republic, or the person acting for him, shall receive, and the salary so fixed cannot be increased except for the ensuing Constitutional period.
82. The President of the United States of Venezuela, or the person who may act for him, is liable for treason or for offences at common law.
83. The President of the Republic shall cease to exercise his functions on the 19th day of April of the year which terminates the Presidential period, and on the same day the President of the Federal Court of Cassation shall take charge of the Executive power until the newly elected President shall have been installed.
Section 4.Concerning Cabinet Ministers.
84. The President of the United States of Venezuela shall have for his Cabinet the Ministers whom the law designates. This law shall determine their duties and functions and shall organize their Departments. The Federal Executive is empowered to create, during recess of the Legislative Chambers, such Ministries as they may deem necessary.
85. In order to be a Minister of the Cabinet it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, a layman, over 30 years of age, and to be in the enjoyment of one's political and civil rights.
86. The Ministers are the sole legal organs of the President of the United States of Venezuela. All the acts of the latter shall be countersigned by the Minister or Ministers to whose Departments the said acts refer, and without this requisite such acts, are void and shall not be carried out nor executed by the authorities, employees, or individuals. In so far as concerns the Administration of the Federal District, the legal organ-of the President shall be a Governor appointed by him.
87. All the acts of the Ministers shall be in conformity with this Constitution and the laws. Their personal responsibility is not absolved by the order of the President, although they may receive it in writing.
88. The responsibility for the acts of the President decided upon in Cabinet meeting attaches to the Ministers jointly.
89. The Ministers shall report to the Chambers every year, within the first ten days of their ordinary sessions, in detailed reports, substantiated by documents, of what they have done or tried to do in their respective Departments. They shall also furnish the written or verbal reports which are asked of them, and they shall likewise present, within the first ten days of the second month of the sessions, the general estimate of the revenue and expenditure and the general accounts, besides the account, of each Executive Department, in conformity with the provisions of the law.
90. The Ministers have a right to address the Houses, and they are obliged to attend them when they are called upon to report.
01. The Ministers are responsible
(1.) For treason to the country ;
(2.) For breach of the Constitution and of the laws;
(3.) For incurring expenditure greater than appears in their estimates;
(4) For corruption or bribery in the dispatch, of the business of their office;
(5.) For malversation of the public funds; and
(6.) For offences at common law.
Title VII.Concerning the Judicial Power.
Section J.
92. The judicial power of the Republic is vested in the Federal Court of Cassation, and in the other Tribunals and Courts established by law.
93. The employees of the judicial power are responsible in the cases designated by law: for treason or corruption or bribery in the discharge of their duties; for infringements of the Constitution and of the- laws, and for offences at common law.
Section 2.Concerning the Federal Court of Cassation.
91. The Federal Court of Cassation is the Supreme Tribunal of the Federation and of the States, and shall be composed of seven members elected by Congress, who shall hold office for seven years.
Sole Paragraph.The members of the Federal Court of Cassation must be Venezuelan by birth, over 30 years of age, laymen and lawyers of the Republic.
95. For the appointment of the Federal Court of Cassation, which Congress must effect within the first thirty days of its sessions. Congress shall be divided into groups of States and the Federal District in the following manner, and each group shall present two candidates, in order that from among them Congress may elect the member of the Federal Court of Cassation who is to represent each group therein :
First group: States of Aragua and Miranda, and the Federal
District.
Second group: States of Carabobo, Cojedes, and Gimrieo.
Third group: States of Merida, Taehira, and Trujillo.
Fourth group: States of Lara, Falcon, and Zulin.
Fifth group: States of Zamora, Portuguesa, and Yaracuy.
Sixth group: States of Apure, Nueva Esparata, and Monagas.
Seventh group: States of Sucre, Anzoategui, and Bolivar.
96. The Federal Court of Cassation shall be elected by Congress by secret vote and in permanent session.
Sole Paragraph.The seven candidates designated by the groups who are not elected members of the Federal Court of Cassation shall ipso facto be substitutes for the respective members.
97. Absolute vacancies among the principal members shall be filled until the next session of the National Legislature, the Court itself, in each case, choosing by lot one of the substitutes.
98. The following are the attributes of the Federal Court of Cassation:
(1.) To take cognizance of charges against the President of the Republic or the person filling his place, against the Cabinet Ministers, the Prosecutor-General of the nation, the Governor of the Federal District, and against the members themselves in the cases in which the said functionaries are responsible according to this Constitution.
(2.) To take cognisance of criminal proceedings which may be instituted against the Vice-Presidents of the Republic. 
(3.)To take cognizance of criminal causes or those involving the responsibility of the Presidents of the States and other high officials thereof, as the laws of the latter determine; applying in the matter of responsibility the laws of the various States, and in default thereof the general laws of the nation. In the three foregoing cases the Court shall declare whether or not there is reason for prosecution. If it declare in the affirmative, the accused official is ipso facto suspended; if they declare the latter, all procedure shall cease. When the offence is one of common law the matter shall pass to the ordinary tribunals, and if it be of a political nature the Court shall continue to take cognizance thereof until final judgment.
(4.) To take cognizance of the civil or criminal actions which may be brought against diplomatic agents in cases permitted by the public law of nations.
(5.) To take cognizance of cases involving responsibility brought against diplomatic agents of the Government accredited to other Governments for abuse of their functions.
(6.) To take cognizance of the claims which are brought against the nation.
(7.) To take cognizance of appeals in Cassation in the form and terms established by the law.
(8.) To take cognizance of prize cases.
(9.) To decide, save in the exceptions established in Article 3 of this Constitution, controversies of any nature which may arise between political functionaries of the different States; between one or more States and those of the nation and the Federal District; and between the tribunals and national functionaries in matters within the competence of the Court. 
(10.) To adjust any contentious which may arise between the judicial employees or functionaries of separate Stales and between them and citizens of the Federal District, and between those of a State or of the Federal District, provided that there exists no authority competent to decide them.
(11.) To declare the nullity of the national laws or those of the States when they conflict with the Constitution of the
Republic.
(12.) To declare which law, decree, or resolution is in force when the national laws are found to conflict with themselves or with those of the States.
(13.) To declare the nullity of any Article or Articles of the Law which conflict with others of the same ; to declare the nullity of all the acts of the Legislative Chambers or of the Federal Executive which violate the rights guaranteed to the States or which threaten their autonomy, and the acts of the Legislative Assemblies or of the Municipal Councils which conflict with paragraphs 10, 11, 12, and 13 of Article 19, paragraph I; of paragraph 15 of Article 22, and of Article 117 of this Constitution.
(14.) To declare the nullity of all the acts referred to in Articles 29 and 30 of this Constitution, provided always that
they emanate from an authority of the nation, or of the Federal District, or from the high officials of the States.
(15.) To take cognizance of the controversies resulting from contracts or negotiations made by the President of the Republic.
(16.) To declare, saving the contrary provisions of public Treaties, the binding force of the judgments of foreign Courts, subject to the conditions established by law.
(17.) To take cognizance of the suits to nullify titles to mines, waste and municipal lands, and of the controversies which may arise from a refusal to issue the same on the part of the competent authority.
 (18.) The other attributions prescribed by this Constitution and the laws.
99. The Federal Court of Cassation shall render every year to Congress, in writing, an account of its labours, and shall also give information of the difficulties which, in their opinion, stand in the way of harmonising civil, criminal, and commercial legislation.
100. The members of the Federal Court of Cassation who have entered upon the exercise of their duties, whilst exercising these, cannot accept any employment whatsoever from the Federal Executive.
101. The law shall fix the salaries which are to be received by the members of the Federal Court of Cassation.
Section 3.Concerning the Prosecutor-General of the Nation.
102. The Public Administration is under the direction of the Prosecutor-General of the nation, in conformity with the law.
103. In order to be a Prosecutor-General it is necessary to be a Venezuelan by birth, over 30 years of age, and a lawyer of the Republic. 
104. The Prosecutor -General shall hold office for three years, and in his permanent or temporary absence the office shall be filled by two substitutes in the order of their election.
Sole Paragraph. The President of the Republic shall appoint the substitutes when their posts become permanently vacant.
105. 'The following are the functions of the Prosecutor-General:
(1.) To promote the execution of the laws and of the administrative regulations:
(2.) To issue all legal opinions which the Federal Executive and the Federal Court of Cassation may require of him;
(3.) To watch that all Federal employees discharge their duties;
(4.) To initiate, on the demand of the President of the Republic, proceedings before the competent authority against Federal officials for misconduct in the exercise of their official duties, making them responsible for the same;
(5.) To act as Public Prosecutor in the trials referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3, relative to the Federal Court of Cassation when no party is plaintiff, since in this case the General Public Prosecutor of the Court would act as such;
(6.) To give an account to the President of the Republic of his actions in the discharge of functions 1, 3, and 4, which are assigned to him by this Article;
(7.) To promote and conduct the suits in which the nation is interested, and to defend its rights in the actions or claims which are brought against it, being obliged in both cases to carry out the instructions communicated to him by the Federal Government; and
(8.) To execute the other duties which this Constitution and the laws prescribe.
TitleVIII.General Dispositions.
106. All that has not been expressly attributed to the general administration of the nation in this Constitution is within the competence of the States. These shall lay down in their respective Constitutions that the Constitutional period of their public powers shall last for three years, counting from the 20th February of the year in which the constitutional term ends. 
107. All Magistrates, authorities, or corporations are forbidden to exercise any function which, is not expressly attributed to them by the Constitution and the laws.
108. The Tribunals of Justice in the States are independent. The causes initiated therein shall terminate in the same State without other examination than that of the Federal Court of Cassation, in those cases in which the law permits it. 
109. The national public force is divided into naval and land forces, and shall be composed of the militia of citizens organized in conformity with the law.
110. In case of war the contingent shall be increased by bodies of citizen militia up to the number of men necessary to meet the requirements of the Federal Government.
111. The military and civil authority shall never be exercised simultaneously by one and the same person or corporation except in cases of disturbance of the public order.
112. The rights of ecclesiastical patronage, being vested in the nation, shall be exercised in conformity with the provisions of the Law of the 28th July, 1824.
113. The Federal Government shall not have in the States any resident officials with jurisdiction or authority other than those employed in the States themselves. Exception is made for those of the Treasury, those of public instruction, of the posts, of the telegraphs and telephones, of sanitation; those whom the organization of the Congress renders necessary for mines, salines, and liquor revenue in the exercise of its powers under paragraph 28, Article 19, of this Constitution; those belonging to the forces which are destined for the safeguarding of the frontiers or the garrisoning of the fortresses, magazines, naval stations, and open ports; they shall not, however, cease to be subject to the general laws of the State in which they reside, and to be liable to be immediately removed or replaced by the Federal Executive or by whoever may have 'authority at the request of the Government of the respective
State and for legitimate reasons.
114. The national officials shall not accept presents, employments, honours, or recompense from foreign Governments without the consent of the Senate.
115. All warlike material shall belong to the nation.
116. Any citizen may accuse national officials or those of the States before the Tribunals or the superior authorities designated by the law.
117. Exportation is free in Venezuela, and no Customs duties can be imposed thereon.
118. No expenditure shall be made from the national Treasury for which a sum of money has not been expressly applied by Congress in the general estimates of public expenditure or unless an additional credit has been passed with the affirmative vote of the Council of Ministers; and those who infringe this disposition shall be civilly responsible to the national Treasury for the sums which they may have paid out. In every payment ordinary expenses shall have preference over extraordinary ones. When the sum allotted is not sufficient, or in cases of emergency the Minister of the Department shall ask the Council of Ministers to grant an additional credit and cannot make any disposition in this respect except after he has been authorized by an Executive decree with the approval of the Council of Ministers. All additional credits must be submitted for the approval of Congress at its next session.
119. Neither the Legislative nor the Executive power nor of any authority of the Republic shall .in any case or for any reason issue paper money, nor declare the forced circulation of banknotes, nor of any security represented by paper, nor can it order the coining of silver or nickel money without previous authorization of the national Congress, given with the same procedure as that established for the sanction of the laws.
120. In international Treaties a clause shall be inserted to the following effect: All differences between the Contracting Parties relative to the interpretation or execution of this Treaty shall be decided by arbitration."
121. No contract of public interest made by the Federal Government or that of the States, or by the municipalities or by any other public power, can be transferred in whole or in part to a foreign Government, and in all such contracts the following clause shall be considered as incorporated, even though it be not expressly stated: " The disputes and controversies of any nature which may arise concerning this contract, and which cannot be amicably decided by the Contracting Parties, shall be decided by the competent Tribunals of Venezuela in conformity with its laws, and cannot for any reason or cause become the subject of foreign claims. Companies which are formed to carry out such contracts shall establish their legal domicile in Venezuela.
- 122. No individual can discharge at the same time more than one public salaried employment. The acceptance of a second employment whatsoever is equivalei.t to the resignation of the first, except for professors of public instruction and the employees in academies and hospitals.
123. All Venezuelans may elect and be elected to public office, if they are in the enjoyment of the rights of a citizen, 124. During popular elections all persons belonging to the public national forces who are interested in the controversy shall remain at their quarters for the whole period of the election.
125. The armed force cannot deliberate; it is passive and obedient. No armed body can make requisitions nor demand help of any class except from the civil authorities and in the manner and form prescribed by the laws. Commanders of the forces who infringe this provision shall be tried and punished according to the laws.
126. The law shall regulate the manner in which national officials upon assuming office shall take, the oath to discharge their duties.
127. For all acts of civil and political life of the States, the basis of population shall be that fixed by the last census of the Republic and approved by Congress.
128. The Constitutional periods in the Executive and Judicial branches of the Federal power shall run for seven years, and shall be reckoned from the l9th day of April of the year of the election.
129. In all public acts and official documents of the nation or of the States, the date of the independence, counting from the 19th April, 1810, and that of the Federation, the 20th February, 1859, shall be quoted.
130. This Constitution is susceptible of amendment or addition, but neither the one nor the other shall be decreed by the national Congress except in its ordinary sessions and at the request of three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States in ordinary session; but amendments or additions shall be made only with respect to those points on which the majority of the States are agreed.
131. Constitutional amendments and additions shall be made with the same procedure as that established for the sanction of laws.
132. An amendment or addition having been agreed to by the Congress, its President shall submit the same to the legislative assemblies of the States for definite ratification.
133. Congress may also take the initiative in amendments or additions and pass them in the manner indicated in the preceding Article, but in that case they shall be considered to have been sanctioned without the ratification of three-fourths of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
134. Whether the Legislative Assemblies of the States or the Legislative Chambers initiate amendments or additions, the final vote of the States shall always be returned to the national Congress on which devolves the duty of scrutinizing it.
135. The present Constitution shall be promulgated and shall take effect as soon as the National Congress shall have counted the votes of the Legislative Assemblies of the States and ascertained that they have ratified the amendments and additions.
Temporary Provision
Article 136.  The First and Second Vice-Presidents of the Republic for the present term shall be elected as soon as this Constitution shall be promulgated.
Final Provision
Article 137. The Constitution of the 13th June, 1914, is hereby repealed.
Done at the Federal Legislative Palace at Caracas, this 19th day of June, 1922. Promulgated, June 24, 1922.

