Adopted by the National Assembly in Belgrade in December, 1888, and proclaimed by the King on December 21, 1888
I. The Form of Government, State Religion, and Territory of the Kingdom
Article 1. The government of the Kingdom of Serbia is a constitutional, parliamentary, and hereditary monarchy.
Article 2. The coat of arms of the Kingdom is a double-headed white eagle, upon a red shield, with a royal crown.
The royal crown rests on both heads of the eagle, and there is a fleur-de-lis in each claw. There is the coat of arms of the Principality of Serbia on the eagle’s breast, “a white cross over a red background, and a firesteel in each corner.”
The national colors are: red, blue, and white.
Article 3. The state religion of Serbia is Eastern Orthodox Christianity.
The Serbian Orthodox Church is autocephalous. It does not depend on any foreign Church; however, it does share the dogmatic unity of the Universal Eastern Church.
Article 4. The state territory of the Kingdom of Serbia can be neither alienated, nor divided.
It can be neither diminished, nor can parts of it can be exchanged, without approval of the Grand National Assembly. However, in case of a border adjustment, approval of the Regular National Assembly is sufficient for non-populated areas of lesser importance.
Article 5. The Kingdom of Serbia consists of fifteen districts. The districts are divided into counties; and the counties are divided into municipalities.
II. Citizenship Rights
Article 6. Acquisition and loss of Serbian citizenship, and the rights attached to it, are regulated under this Constitution and law.
Article 7. All Serbs are equal before the law.
Article 8. It is forbidden to grant tittles of nobility to Serbian citizens, or recognize them.
Article 9. Personal liberty is guaranteed by this Constitution. 
No one can be held responsible, except in cases provided by law.
No one can be imprisoned or deprived of their liberty by anyone, without a written warrant giving the reasons and facts, substantiating the charges of the competent authorities. The charges must be submitted to the party accused at the time of arrest. Only culprits surprised in flagrante delicto can be arrested without any prior warrant, but even then a written report shall be drawn up and communicated to them within twenty-four hours from the moment of arrest.
Against an order for imprisonment an appeal can be made within three days to the competent court. If there is no appeal filed within this period the prosecuting authorities must send their decision to the court within twenty-four hours. The court shall affirm or annul the arrest within a new period of twenty-four hours. The court decision becomes executive immediately.  
Authorities who violate these provisions shall be punished for unlawful deprivation of liberty.
It shall be set by law in what cases a court is required to release the person arrested, with or without personal or monetary bail.
Article 10. No one can be tried except by a competent court.
Article 11. No one can be sentenced until they have been authoritatively heard, or they have been summoned to defend themselves according to law. 
Article 12. Punishments can be dealt only by law and applied only to the acts for which the law provides and prescribes them.
Article 13. The death penalty cannot be inflicted for purely political crimes.
An exception to this rule is (attempt at) assassination of a member of the Royal House, for which the death penalty is provided in the criminal code. 
Also excluded from this rule are cases, in which a political crime is accompanied by another criminal offense, for which the death penalty is provided in the criminal code; as well as those cases, which the military law punishes with the death penalty.
Article 14. A Serbian citizen can be neither expelled from the country, nor displaced within the country, except in cases provided by law.
Article 15. The home is inviolable. 
The authorities cannot attempt any search or investigation in the home of a citizen, except in cases authorized by law, and in the manner prescribed by law.  
Before any search can be made, the authorities are required to give the person, whose home is being searched, a written notice from the competent authorities, on the strength of which the search is made. Against this order there is an appeal to a court of first instance. However, the appeal does not delay the process of search. The search must always be made in the presence of two citizens. 
Immediately after the search is completed, the authorities are required to give the person, whose home was searched, a statement of the results of the search, and a signed list of all articles taken for the purpose of further investigation.
In no case can the police enter a private home at night.
Article 16. Property of every kind is inviolable.
No one can be constrained to yield their goods to the State, or for any public needs, or undergo any restriction in their favor, except in cases provided by law, and in consideration of a legal indemnity.
Article 17. The penalty of confiscation of property is forbidden.
However, objects arising from a fraudulent source, or objects having served or destined to serve in the accomplishment of a crime can be confiscated.
Article 18. Freedom of conscience is absolute. Acknowledged religions are placed under the protection of law, as far as their practices do not infringe upon the public order or morals. 
Article 19. Every act that could infringe upon the State religion (proselytism) is forbidden.
Article 20. Serbian citizens cannot take advantage of religious precepts, with a view to avoid fulfillment of their duties as citizens and soldiers.
Article 21. Learning is free, as far as it does not infringe upon the public order or morals. 
Elementary education is mandatory. It is free in public elementary schools. 
Article 22. Every Serbian has the right to express themselves freely, while conforming to the prescriptions of law. 
Freedom of press is guaranteed.
Censorship, or any other measure aimed at restricting printing, selling, and distributing literature or newspapers is forbidden.
Publishing a newspaper does not require approval from the authorities. 
Writers, editors, publishers, or printers shall not be required to provide any kind of warranty (bail). 
Newspapers and other print can be forbidden (seized) only if containing libel on the King or a member of the Royal House, foreign ruling heads, or a call to arms. However, in these cases the authorities are required to take the matter to court within twenty-four hours after the suspension, and the court is required to sustain or dismiss the charge within twenty-four hours. Otherwise, the suspension is considered rescinded.
The press cannot be subject of administrative warnings. 
All newspapers are required to have an editor, enjoying civil and political rights.
Writers are held responsible for their writings. When the writer is unknown, does not live in Serbia, or is unable to be held responsible, the editor, printer, or distributor shall be held responsible instead.
Article 23. The privacy of letters and telegraphic dispatches is inviolable; except in time of war, and in case of criminal inquiry. 
It shall be set by law what government agents are responsible for violations of the privacy of letters and dispatches.
Article 24. Serbian citizens have the right to assemble, peacefully and without weapons, while conforming to the provisions of law. 
The authorities need not be advised of assemblies in closed space. The authorities shall be advised of assemblies in the open air, which are subject to special laws and regulations.
Article 25. Serbian citizens have the right of association, as long as they conform to the provisions of law. 
This right cannot be surpassed by any preventive measure.  
Article 26. Every Serbian has the right of petition, which can be signed by one or more citizens. Only offices and legal entities have the right of collective petition. 
Article 27. Every Serbian has the right file a complaint against illegal actions of the authorities. 
If a superior authority rejects the complaint as being ill-founded, the authority is required, in communicating its decision to the complainant, to indicate the reasons therefore. 
Article 28. Every Serbian has the right to bring complaint to court, directly and without anyone’s approval, against government or self-governing bodies for infringing upon the citizen’s rights in the exercise of their power.
Special provisions are applicable in this regard to ministers, judges, and professional soldiers. 
Article 29. Every citizen has the right to renounce their citizenship, after they have fulfilled their obligations to the government and other individuals. 
Article 30. Aliens residing in Serbia are placed under protection of Serbian laws, as to their persons and possessions. However, they are required to pay taxes and other charges for the benefit of the State, unless exempted by international treaties. 
Article 31. Extradition is forbidden for crimes purely political.
III. Government Authorities
Article 32. All government functions are carried out according to this Constitution. 
Neither the Constitution, nor parts of it, can be abolished. 
Article 33. Legislative power is vested in the King and National Assembly together. 
Article 34. Both agents of the legislative power have the right to introduce a bill.
Article 35. Passing a bill requires approval of both agents of the legislative power.  
Article 36. New laws shall not restrict rights provided by earlier laws. 
Article 37. Only the legislative authorities have the right to interpret laws. 
Article 38. Executive power is administered by the King, through his responsible ministers, according to provisions of this Constitution.
The King appoints and dismisses ministers.  
Article 39. Judicial power is administered by courts. Their rulings and sentences are pronounced and administered in the name of the King, according to law.   
IV. The King
Article 40. The King is the head of the State. He holds all rights that derive from this supreme authority, and exercises them according to provisions of this Constitution. 
The King’s person is inviolable. The King cannot be held responsible, nor sued. 
Article 41. The King and his children must be of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith.
Article 42. All religions recognized by the State are under protection of the King. 
Article 43. The King approves and promulgates laws. A law cannot enter into force, until promulgated by the King. 
Article 44. The heir to the throne and other members of the Royal House cannot get married without King’s approval. 
Article 45. The King appoints all public servants. All government authorities perform their functions on his behalf, and under his supervision.
Article 46. The King is the commander-in-chief of all military forces of the country.
Article 47. The King bestows military titles, as prescribed by law.
Article 48. The King awards medals and other state insignia, as prescribed by law. 
Article 49. The King has the right to have money coined, as prescribed by law. 
Article 50. The King has the right of amnesty.
Article 51. The King has the right to grant amnesty for criminal offenses. He can lighten, reduce, or pardon a sentence.  
Article 52. The King represents the country in foreign affairs. He declares war and executes peace treaties, treaties of alliance, and others; he communicates them to the National Assembly, when, and if, permitted by state interests.
Approval of the National Assembly is mandatory for treaties of commerce, as well as all other treaties, the execution of which would involve an expenditure at the expense of the public treasury; a modification of existing laws; or limiting of public or private rights of Serbian citizens. 
Article 53. The King resides in the country permanently.
Should it be necessary for the King to leave the country for a short time, the heir to the throne shall represent him. If the heir to the throne is a minor, or prevented from acting by any reason, the King shall be represented by the Council of Ministers, in accordance with the instructions given by the King, within the boundaries of the Constitution.
Article 54. The King convokes the National Assembly for regular or extraordinary sessions. 
The King opens and closes sessions of the National Assembly in person, by a discourse from the throne, through the Council of Ministers, by a message, or a decree. Discourses from the throne, messages, and decrees must be countersigned by all ministers. 
The King has the right to adjourn a session of the National Assembly; however, the recess cannot not be longer than two months, and cannot be renewed in the same session, without approval of the National Assembly.
The King has the right to dismiss the National Assembly; however, the decree of dismissal shall contain an order for new election, at the latest within two months’ time, and an order convoking the National Assembly, at the latest within three months from the day of the dismissal. The act of dissolution shall be countersigned by all ministers.
Article 55. The King cannot rule over any other state, without approval of the Grand National Assembly.
Article 56. No royal decree related to state affairs can enter into force, or be executed, unless countersigned by the competent minister, who thus assumes responsibility for the decree. 
Article 57. In Serbia, the ruler is King Milan I, the fourth Obrenovic. 
His successor is Crown Prince Alexander, the fifth Obrenovic. 
Crown Prince Alexander shall be succeeded the following way:
The King is succeeded by his male descendant, from a legal marriage, in the order of primogeniture. Should the King leave after him no male descendant, the throne shall be succeeded along the collateral line, by King’s male cousins, in the order of primogeniture. 
Article 58. The King and the heir to the throne are of age when they attain 18 years.
Article 59. In case of death of the King, the heir to the throne, if he is of age, immediately takes authority, and announces the same to the people by proclamation. 
Within ten days, he takes the prescribed oath before the National Assembly.
If the National Assembly has adjourned earlier, and the new Assembly is not elected, the old National Assembly is reconvened.
The same applies in case of abdication of the King.
Article 60. The King takes the following oath before the National Assembly:
“I (name), ascending to the throne of the Kingdom of Serbia, and taking over the Royal power, swear by the Almighty God, that I will watch over the independence and integrity of the Kingdom; that I will uphold the Constitution, and keep it intact; that I will rule in accordance with the Constitution and laws; and that in all my acts and aims, I shall have in view the people’s welfare. So help me God! Amen!”
Article 61. If the heir to the throne is a minor at the time of the King’s death, the royal prerogatives are performed by three regents, until the heir to the throne is of age.
Article 62. The regents are elected by the National Assembly, specifically convoked for this purpose, among six individuals the King appointed candidates in his will.
The will shall be hand-written and signed by the King. The will shall not be countersigned by ministers. All members of the Council of Ministers shall sign the will on the back as witnesses. 
Three copies of the will are written, each bearing the impression of a royal stamp seal. One copy is given to the State Council; another to the Court of Cassation; and the last one to the Guard of the Royal Seal. 
Article 63. In case the King has not appointed candidates for the regency in his will, the Grand National Assembly shall be convoked to elect the regents, at the latest within a month of the King’s death. 
Article 64. The regents must be Serbian citizens by birth, of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith, enjoying all civil and political rights; forty years of age; and currently be, or were ministers, state counselors, generals, or members of the National Assembly, accredited by foreign courts. 
Article 65. The regents are elected by secret ballot.
Article 66. The civil list of the King is created in accordance with law. Once set, the civil list cannot be enlarged without approval of the National Assembly, nor reduced without King’s approval. 
Every state official shall receive 60,000 dinars from the King’s civil list per annum of his service. 
Article 67. The regents shall take an oath to be loyal to the King, and to rule according to the Constitution and the earthly laws, before the Assembly, which elected them. Then, the regents shall announce the same to the people by proclamation.
Article 68. No changes can be made to the Constitution, while the King is a minor. 
Article 69. In case the King is prevented from performing royal acts, he shall be represented by the heir to the throne, if he is of age. If the heir to the throne is a minor, the King can appoint temporary regents. 
Article 70. In case the King abdicates in favor of the heir is a throne, who is a minor, the King has the right to appoint three regents at the same time. The same provisions of this Constitution that apply to the regents elected by the National Assembly, also apply to the regents appointed by the King. 
Article 71. In case of death of a regent, or if the state of his health does not longer permit him to perform his functions, in the opinion of three physicians appointed by the State Council, and the other two regents; or in case he resigns, the other two regents shall perform the government functions without him, until the next session of the National Assembly, when the third regent shall be elected. 
In case one of the three regents needs to leave the country temporarily, the other two regents can, in his absence, rule effectively. However, in that case, the regent leaving the country temporarily shall leave the other two regents a written declaration, accepting everything they will do in his absence, as long as it is within the limits of their constitutionally prescribed authority. 
In each of these cases, the reason why only two regents will be ruling, shall be made public immediately. 
Article 72.  The regents shall supervise the education of the minor heir to the throne, in case of the King’s death. However, if case of the abdication of the King, the abdicating King shall supervise the education of the minor heir to the throne. 
Trustees, appointed by the late King in his will, or named by the regents in agreement with the State Council, shall supervise the minor King’s property.
Article 73.  If at the time of the King’s death there is no male descendant, but the Queen is enceinte, the following individuals shall exercise the King’s authority until the time of the birth: the President of the State Council, the President of the Court of Cassation, and the Minister of Justice. 
Article 74. In all cases for which this Constitution prescribes electing the regents, the Council of Ministers shall exercise King’s constitutionally outlined power temporarily, on its own responsibility.
The Council of Ministers shall then announce to the people, by a proclamation, that it has taken power, and for what reason. 
Article 75. In case the throne is left without an heir, in accordance with provisions of this Constitution, the Council of Ministers shall take charge of the royal powers.
The Council of Ministers shall at once convoke the National Assembly for an extraordinary session, to decide on the matter of succession.
V. National Assembly
Article 76. The National Assembly is a parliamentary body.
The National Assembly can be either Regular or Grand.
Article 77. The National Assembly is composed of representatives, freely elected by the people, according to provisions of this Constitution. 
Article 78. Representatives to the National Assembly are elected directly. The ballot is secret, and uses marbles. 
Article 79. The number of representatives elected by each district is proportionate to the number of tax payers. A district elects one representative per every 4,500 tax payers. If the surplus of taxpayers in a district surpasses 3,000, that district shall elect an additional representative. 
The number of representatives elected by a district includes the representatives, for which Article 100 of this Constitution prescribes special stipulations. 
Article 80. A special committee, including the President of the State Council, the President and both Vice-Presidents of the most recent Assembly, and the President of the Court of Cassation, shall determine the number of taxpayers and the number of representatives elected per each district, for every general election.
Article 81. The municipality of Belgrade elects four representatives; the municipalities of Nis and Kragujevac two each; and the municipalities of Aleksinac, Valjevo, Vranja, Gornji Milanovac, Zajecar, jagodina, Knjazevac, Krusevac, Loznica, Leskovac, Negotin, paracin, pirot, Pozarevac, Prokuplje, Svilajinac, Smederevo, Cuprija, Uzice, Cacak, and Sabac one each. 
Article 82. The rural municipality, to which the Village of Dobrinje in the Uzicki District belongs, and the rural municipality, to which the Village of Takovo in the Rudnicki district belongs, elect one representative each. 
Article 83. Every representative represents the whole of people, and not only those who elected him.
Article 84. The voters cannot give, nor can representatives receive, commanding and mandatory instructions. 
Article 85. The right to vote belongs to all Serbian citizens (either by birth or naturalized), over the age of 21, who pay the State at least 15 dinars direct taxes per annum.
Members of a zadruga [a type of rural community], above the age of 21, have the right to vote, regardless of the tax amount they pay the State. 
Whoever wants to use their right to vote, must first acquire a voting card. The authorities are required to issue a voting card to everyone, who demonstrates, either by a receipt, or a tax paying protocol, that they have paid the required tax amount in the current, or the previous half of the year.
Article 86. Every voter has the right to vote in only one location, in that electoral district, in which he is registered as a voter. 
Article 87. Military officers, both active and inactive, and professional soldiers, do not have the right to vote.
Article 88. The franchise is denied temporarily to those:
1. Who are sentenced to prison, until their rights are restored;
2. Who are sentenced to lose their citizenship, for the duration of the sentence;
3. Who are imprisoned, or taken in custody for crimes or violations described in (1) and (2);
4. Who are sentenced, by a court ruling, for abusing their authority, threats, gifts, or promises of gifts, to get themselves, or someone else elected; or for selling their vote; for the duration of the sentence; 
5. Who are fugitives from justice;
6. Who are under guardianship;
7. Who entered into a foreign country’s service, without approval of the Serbian government;
8. Who are sentenced for avoiding civil or military duties, as members of certain faiths, for the duration determined by court ruling. 
Article 89. All voters belonging to one district compose an electoral body, and vote for the whole electoral list, rather than individual candidates. The electoral process is the same for those municipalities that elect more than one representative.
Article 90. In districts, voting will take place in several locations, in accordance with provisions of the electoral law. Municipalities can also be divided into several voting sections, as needed.
Article 91. In every voting location, an electoral committee shall be formed, including an alderman, elected by the municipal council, out of representatives of every electoral list, a judge, and a law clerk or an attorney.   
Article 92. In every major voting location, an electoral commission shall be formed to collect and count votes, proclaim the result of the election, and give representatives authorizations. 
Either a member of the State Council or of the Court of Cassation, determined by lot, shall preside over the commission. Its members shall include: an alderman, the president of the municipal electoral committee, a member of the Court of Appeals, or the president of a court of first instance, and two representatives of each electoral list.
Article 93. In every district, one hundred of voters; and in every municipality that elects more than one representative, fifty voters, have the right to create their own electoral list. Every list shall include as many names as the number of representatives the respective district or municipality elects. The list shall be named after the candidate who heads it. The list shall have its own ballot box at every voting location.  
Article 94. In municipalities that elect one representative, and in those rural municipalities that have the electoral right, according to the Article 98 of this Constitution, the candidate who won absolute majority of votes, shall be considered elected.
If no one gets absolute majority of votes, the election shall be repeated. In the second round of the election, relative majority is sufficient; in case of a tie vote, the winner shall be determined by lot.
The electoral committee, in charge of giving authorizations to representatives shall consist of: a judge of either the municipal, or the closest court of first instance, determined by lot; the president of the municipal court; and one representative of each candidate.
Article 95. Only those who have the right to vote can be elected representatives to the National Assembly.
Article 96. In addition to having the right to vote, representatives to the National Assembly must fulfill the following conditions:
1. Be Serbian by birth, or, if a naturalized citizen, must have been residing in Serbia for a minimum of five years;
2. Enjoy all civil and political rights;
3. Have a permanent residence in Serbia, excluding those who work in public service abroad;  
4. Be thirty years of age;
5. Pay the State at least 30 dinars direct taxes per annum.
Article 97. Police officials cannot be elected representatives.
Article 98. Representatives who were previously not public servants, and enter into public service during their mandate, thus forfeit the mandate. However, they can be re-elected representatives, according to Article 99.
This stipulation does not apply to ministers, who need not be reelected, in order to remain representatives. 
Article 99. If elected representatives, public servants, and all those who are in public service, forfeit their position by accepting their mandate. The following public servants shall not be stripped of their public position, upon becoming representatives:
1. Ministers, both active and inactive;
2. Members of the State Council;
3. Extraordinary and authorized ministers, accredited by foreign courts; diplomatic agents, and general counsels; 
4. Presidents and members of higher and courts of first instance;
5. Professors of the Belgrade Higher School, vocational, and high schools;
6. Engineers and physicians in public service;
7. Retirees and inactive public servants.
Article 100. Among representatives in every district, there should be two persons, who fulfill the following condition, in addition to the other conditions:
To have completed college education, or its equivalent, either in the country or abroad.
In place of this condition, qualifications of the following individuals shall be accepted:
a. Presidents or vice-presidents of the National Assembly;
b. Ministers and diplomatic agents, current or former; 
c. President, vice-president, and members of the State Council, current or former;
d. Retired generals and colonels.
These two representatives are elected the same day and the same way as the other representatives, but in a separate ballot. 
Article 101. Representatives to the Regular National Assembly are elected in the general election, for a period of three years. Every three years, the election takes place on the Exhalation of the Holy Cross, on September 14.  
In case the general election takes place after the National Assembly has been dismissed, the three-year term starts next September. Before the beginning of that term, the National Assembly can be convoked for an extraordinary session.
Mandate of the representatives elected in by-elections lasts until the end of the National Assembly’s term in which they were elected. By-elections must take place no later than a month from the moment the seat became vacant.
Article 102. The National Assembly is regularly convoked in the capital on November 1, every year. 
Only under exceptional circumstances the Assembly can be convoked outside the capital, and the government is required to account for the circumstances at the very session held outside the capital. 
Every regular session of the National Assembly lasts at least six weeks.
Article 103. The King can convoke the National Assembly for an extraordinary session.
Article 104. The National Assembly is in charge of its members’ jurisdictions, determines their merits, and resolves conflicts among them.
No one can prevent an elected representative, granted authority by the competent electoral committee (according to Articles 92 and 94 of this Constitution), from entering the Assembly. Only the Assembly has the right to deliberate as to the validity of the election. 
Article 105. During its first session, held under the chairmanship of its oldest member, the Assembly shall be divided into sections by lot. These sections shall then elect one of their members to join the committee in charge of reviewing jurisdictions. 
Article 106. For every session, the National Assembly elects among its members: the president, two vice-presidents, and secretaries.
Article 107. All representatives take the following oath, after their jurisdictions have been verified, and the Assembly accepts them as its members:
“I [name] swear, by the one and only God, to observe faithfully the Constitution, and to have, in the accomplishment of my mission as a representative, constantly in view the common good of the King and of the nation. May God be to me help in this world and in the other.”
Article 108. The Assembly answers King’s decree opening its session with an address.
Article 109. National Assembly’s sessions are public, but they can also be made private, if so requested by the president of the Assembly, the government, or ten representatives. 
If the privacy was requested by either the president of the Assembly, or ten representatives, the Assembly can deliberate as to whether to grant their request. 
Article 110. The Assembly can be in session only if more than a half of its members, as prescribed by the Constitution, are present.
Its conclusions are considered valid, if they have received support of a majority of the present members.
In case of a tied vote, the case, which was up for discussion, is rejected.
Article 111. Voting in the National Assembly can be: aloud, by name; by sitting and standing up; or secret.
Representatives vote aloud on entire bills; and in all cases when the government or twenty representatives request so. 
Officials of the National Assembly are elected by secret ballot. 
Voting can be done in person only.
Article 112. Voting in the National Assembly can be: aloud, by name; by sitting and standing up; or secret.
Article 113. The National Assembly may not start to discuss a bill, including the budget, until the bill has been reviewed and analyzed by a committee, formed out of National Assembly members, convened specially for this purpose. The committee shall submit their opinion regarding the bill to the Assembly.
Article 114. Each bill shall be analyzed by a special committee.
The whole of the budget shall be analyzed by the same committee.
Article 115. No bill may become a law until all of its articles have been approved separately. 
Article 116. In order for a bill to become a law, it shall be adopted twice by the National Assembly in the same composition. The first and the second voting shall take place at least five days apart.
Article 117. No law may be issued, revoked, amended or interpreted without approval of the National Assembly.
Orders concerning execution of laws, as well as orders streaming from King’s supervisory and executive powers, shall be issued by the executive state bodies, but every order shall include the law it is based on.
No law, nor order issued by the State, district or municipal authorities shall be considered binding, until they have been proclaimed properly. 
Such proclamation shall state that the law or order has been adopted by the National Assembly.
Article 118. Laws and orders proclaimed in this way shall be considered binding for all citizens and government bodies. No body, except for the National Assembly, may render decisions as to whether a law or an order has been proclaimed in the way prescribed by the Constitution. 
Article 119. No tax may be imposed nor amended without approval of the National Assembly.
The State may not take a loan without approval of the Assembly. The government is obliged to submit a report to the National Assembly, verified by the Main Control, confirming that the financial agreements have been concluded and carried out in accordance with law.
Article 120. The government may revoke a bill submitted to the Assembly as long as the Assembly has not made its final decision about the bill.
Article 121. Should the Assembly reject a bill, the same bill may not be brought before the Assembly again in the same composition.
Article 122. The Assembly has the right of investigation in electoral and purely administrative matters.
Every member of the Assembly has the right to submit questions and interpellations to ministers. The ministers are obligated to respond while the Assembly is in the same composition.
Article 123. Every member of the Assembly has the right to submit requests and complaints to the Assembly through its President. 
The Assembly has the right to forward the requests and complaints to ministers, and they are obligated to render decisions about the requests and complaints whenever the Assembly requests this.
Only members of the National Assembly, ministers and government officials have the right to speak during Assembly’s sessions. The Assembly may not receive deputations, nor individuals, nor allow for anyone other than the people specified above, to speak during its sessions.
Article 124. No member of the Assembly may be held responsible for a vote they casted as member of the Assembly. They may be fined at the suggestion of the President of the Assembly, in accordance with its internal regulations. 
Article 125. Members of the National Assembly may not be held interrogated nor imprisoned without approval of the Assembly, from the day of their appointment until the end of their mandate, except when caught in flagrante delicto. However, even in that case, the Assembly, if convoked, shall be immediately notified about the incident and shall render decision as to whether the investigation shall be proceeded with.  
Article 126. The Assembly has the exclusive right to maintain order on its premises. 
No armed forces may be installed in the building of the National Assembly or its courtyard. 
No one may enter the National Assembly building armed, except for those armed lawfully coming into the building for business reasons. 
Article 127. The National Assembly may have direct interactions with ministers only. 
Article 128. Members of the National Assembly shall be paid their travel expenses and a daily wage from the State Treasury for the duration of their mandate.
The wage amount shall be determined by a special law.
Article 129. Further provisions concerning National Assembly’s internal regulations shall be determined by a special law. 
Article 130. The Grand National Assembly shall be composed of twice the number of Regular Assembly members. 
Article 100 of this Constitution does not apply to the Grand National Assembly. 
Article 131. The Grand National Assembly shall be convoked:
1. To render decisions regarding the throne (Article 75);
2. To elect regents (Article 63); 
3. To render decisions regarding amendments to the Constitution (Articles 201 and 202);
4. To render decisions regarding reduction or exchange of any part of the state territory (Article 4); and
5. When the King finds it appropriate to audience with the Grand National Assembly.
VI. Ministers
Article 132. At the head of the Public Service is the Council of Ministers, placed immediately under the authority of the King. 
The Council of Ministers consists of ministers, appointed for individual jurisdictions, and the President of the Council of Ministers, who can be without portfolio. All ministers and the President of the Council of Ministers are appointed by the King, through a decree.
Upon entering their duties, ministers take an oath of obedience and of fidelity to the King and swear to observe conscientiously the Constitution and law. 
Article 133. Ministers have to be Serbian by birth, or naturalized citizens, residing in the country for at least five years. 
Article 134. No member of the Royal House can be appointed minister.
Article 135. Ministers have access to the National Assembly, which is required to hear them whenever they request so. However, only ministers, who are also representatives to the National Assembly, have the right to vote in the National Assembly.
The Assembly has the right to request for ministers to be present during its sessions.
Article 136. Ministers are responsible to the King and to the National Assembly for all acts done in the exercise of their functions. 
Every state act signed by the King, shall be countersigned by the competent minister.
An order from the King, either written or oral, cannot in any case cover the legal responsibility of a minister.  
Article 137. Both the King and the National Assembly have the right to impeach a minister: 1) for treason against the country and the sovereign; 2) for violation of the Constitution and of the constitutionally-guaranteed rights of Serbian citizens; 3) for receiving bribe; 4) for doing damage to the State out of self-interest; and 4) for violation of the laws specified later by a special law on ministerial responsibility. 
Statute of limitations for these offenses runs four years after they have been committed.  
Article 138. A proposal to impeach a minister shall be in writing, contain the charges, and be signed by at least twenty representatives. 
Impeachment can be pronounced if at least two thirds of the representatives present vote in favor of this. 
The accused minister shall be tried by the State Court, composed out of members of the State Council and members of the Court of Cassation.
Article 139. A special law, which shall be adopted during the first period of the National Assembly, shall determine closer individual cases of ministerial responsibility; the penalties, which shall be applied in each case; the members of the court prosecuting them; and the court procedure. 
For those cases of ministerial responsibility, which are not outlined in the criminal code as punishable by themselves, the penalty of prison is the highest sentence a minister can get. 
Article 140. The King can neither pardon a minister, nor reduce his sentence, without approval of the National Assembly.
VII. The State Council
Article 141. The State Council is composed of sixteen members, eight of whom are appointed by the King, and eight elected by the National Assembly in the following way: the King brings before the Assembly a list of sixteen candidates, among whom the Assembly elects eight, who the King appoints Counselors; the National Assembly brings before the King a list of sixteen candidates, among whom the King appoints eight as counselors. Vacancies in the State Council are filled the same way. 
Article 142. State counselors are appointed for life. They belong in the category of public servants. Counselors cannot be relieved of their functions, nor called to another employment within public service, without their consent. They cannot be retired without their consent either, unless they have completed forty years of public service; if they are over sixty-five years of age; or if their state of health does not longer permit them to perform their functions. 
If a state counselor is appointed minister, no provision is made for his replacement in the State Council; and, when he ceases to be minister, he returns to his post as state counselor.
Only in the case that the number of members of the State Council drops below the number fixed by the Council’s internal regulations, necessary for its deliberations to have full and entire effect, provision shall immediately be made for as many vacancies as are necessary so that the Council can hold its sessions.
Article 143. State counselors shall be Serbian citizens, over thirty-five years of age, who have completed their college education (or its equivalent), either in Serbia or abroad, and have spent a minimum of ten years in public service.
Those who are currently in public service can be elected or appointed counselors, even if they do not fulfill these conditions. 
Article 144. President and Vice-President of the Council of State are appointed by the King, among state counselors, for a period of three years.
Article 145. The State Council has the following duties: 
1. To draft amendments and administrative orders of general importance at the invitation of the government; and to advise the government on matters brought forward by the government; 
2. To analyze amendments and advise the Government on amendments which the government brings before the Assembly, and the amendments which resulted from parliamentary initiatives. The Council’s opinion is not binding for the Assembly or the government; but shall still be made known to the National Assembly, before it starts deliberating the amendment at question. The Assembly and the government have the right to determine the timeframe, in which the Council can submit its opinion; the Council has the right to ask for an extension of that deadline. If the Council fails to submit its opinion after an extension has been granted, the Assembly shall proceed to deliberate without the Council’s opinion;
3. To compose the Court of Cassation’s candidate list for vacancies in the Main Control, the Court of Cassation, and the Court of Appeals;
4. To render final decisions on complaints regarding elections for municipal assemblies and committees, and for local elections;
5. To act as a disciplinary court for public servants;
6. To deliberate on and resolve complaints against ministerial decisions in administrative orders at issue. These decisions are binding for ministers;
7. To resolve conflicts among administrative authorities; 
8. To approve partial expenditures on general credits included in the budget for extraordinary needs, as well as detailed application of the credit granted for public works, insofar as these expenses exceed the sum of which the minister himself can legally dispose.
9. To approve exceptional cases of entry into Serbian citizenship;
10. To arbitrate between the State and individuals, should this be found advantageous for the State;
11. To deliberate as to whether appropriation of real estate for general public needs is in accordance with law;
12. To perform other duties, attributed to it by law. 
Article 146. Internal regulations of the State Council shall be set by a special law.
VIII. The Courts
Article 147. Courts are independent. 
In rendering justice, they stand under no authority, and work only in accordance with law. 
No government body, legislative or administrative, can perform the work of courts; nor can courts perform legislative or administrative tasks. 
Justice is rendered in the name of the King. 
Article 148. No court can be instituted, nor anything whatever be created in point of judicial organization and competence, unless a law is passed to this effect.
Never and under no circumstance can extraordinary courts, kangaroo courts, or trial commissions be established.  
Article 149. The institution of jury shall be kept.
Its competencies shall be set by law.
Article 150. The following courts exist in Serbia: courts of first instance, the Courts of Appeals, and the Court of Cassation. 
There is just one Court of Cassation, which does not re-examine the facts of a case; it is only competent for verifying the interpretation of law.
This Court of Cassation shall also rule on conflicts between the judicial and administrative bodies. 
The President of the Court of Cassation has the title of ‘state counselor.’
Article 151. No court can hold anyone responsible, or try them, unless competent by law.  
Article 152. Justice is rendered by a panel of three judges.
Only for cases of lesser importance, criminal and civil, can courts be instituted, in which a single judge renders justice. 
Article 153. Hearings are public, except for those cases, from which the public shall be excluded, for the purpose of protecting the public order and morals.   
Judges confer and vote in private, whereas judgment is pronounced aloud, in public. 
Every ruling and order must include a list of reasons and law provisions they are based on.
Article 154. In all crimes and offenses defendant must have an attorney from the beginning of court proceeding. One can have an attorney before the proceeding starts, as described in Article 9 of this Constitution, for the purpose of filing a complaint. If the defendant does not obtain an attorney, they shall be assigned one. The defendant can make statements through their attorney. 
Article 155. All judges are appointed by the King.
Presidents of courts of first instance are appointed from two lists, one of which is brought forward by the Court of Cassation, and the other one by the Court of Appeals. 
Vice-presidents and members of the Court of Cassation and the Court of Appeals are likewise appointed from two lists, one of which is submitted by the State Council, and the other one by the Court of Cassation. 
Every list of candidates must include twice the number candidates as there are vacancies. A candidate can be included in both lists. 
Article 156. Judges, who are consanguineous, cannot preside over the same court at the same time. This also applies to cross-cousins, up to the fourth degree; and in-laws, up to the second degree. 
Article 157. Judges shall be Serbian citizens, who, in addition to other requirements for public service, hold a law degree, obtained either in Serbia or abroad. Judges in courts of first instance must be over twenty-five years of age, while judges in higher courts must be at least thirty.
Additionally vice-presidents of courts of first instance and the Court of Appeals must have completed at least five years as judges of courts of first instance, or as secretaries of the Ministry of Justice, or of courts of higher instance, or as full-time professors of law at the Belgrade Higher School; or alternatively, they must have completed at least seven years as attorneys at law.
In addition to the conditions laid out in the first paragraph of this article, vice-president of the Court of Appeals, as well as President and members of the Court of Cassation, must have completed ten years as judges, or as full-time professors of law at the Belgrade Higher School, or as attorneys at law; alternatively, they must have completed five years as members of the Court of Appeals or as vice-presidents of courts of first instance, or have been ministers of justice. 
Those who have been dismissed from public service by a Court of Cassation ruling cannot be elected, nor appointed presidents or judges of any court. The same applies to those who lost their judicial post as a result of a court of first instance ruling for ordinary, not political, crimes or offenses. 
None of these stipulations apply to judges, who are not in public service.
Article 158. Judges are appointed permanently.
A judge cannot be stripped of their title, or removed from their post for any reason against their will, without a court of the first instance order, or a Court of Cassation disciplinary ruling. 
A judge cannot be sued for anything they have done performing their functions, without approval of the Court of Cassation.
A judge can be relocated to a new post only with his written consent. 
A judge cannot be retired without their consent, unless they are over sixty years of age; or if they have completed forty years of public service; or if their state of health does not longer permit them to perform their functions. However, in the last case, a judge cannot be retired without a Court of the Cassation ruling.
Article 159. A judge cannot accept any additional public service, other than part-time professorship at a law school. A judge cannot be temporarily relocated to another function, paid or voluntary, without their consent. 
Article 160. A special law shall set the membership, structure, and authorities of military courts. 
IX. Counties, Districts and Municipalities
Article 161. In counties, the following bodies of self-government exist in addition to administrative state bodies: county councils, and permanent county committees. Their function is to ensure the protection and advancement of educational, industrial, traffic, medical, and financial interests of the county, as well as to perform other duties assigned to them by the law. 
Article 162. Municipalities are self-governed. 
Municipal court, municipal committee, and municipal assembly are in charge of municipal affairs.
Article 163. Municipal elections are direct.
Article 164. The right to vote in municipal and county elections belongs to every Serbian citizen, who belong to the respective municipality or county, and, in addition to other conditions, pays the State at least 15 dinars direct taxes per annum.
Members of a zadruga, above the age of 21, have the right to vote, regardless of the tax amount they pay the State. 
Article 165. Municipal authorities, as well as municipal assemblies, and permanent municipal committees, shall perform state functions assigned to them, in addition to their respective municipal and county duties.
Article 166. A new municipality cannot be instituted, nor can a municipal territory be altered, without approval of legislative authorities. 
Article 167. Every citizen and all real estate must belong to a municipality, and be subject to a municipal, district, and county laws. 
Article 168. No county or district tax can be levied without approval of the county assembly, and no municipal tax can be levied without approval of the municipal assembly.
County, district, or municipality cannot take a loan without approval of the county assembly, or the municipal assembly.
It shall be set by law in what cases taking a loan requires approval of the legislative, or any other state authority.
Article 169. Counties, districts and municipalities can own property, just like individuals. 
Article 170. Jurisdictions and structure of county, district and municipal bodies of self-governance, as well as the relationship between them and state authorities, shall be set by law.
X. State Finances, State Economy and State Property
Article 171. Every Serbian citizen is required to pay taxes to the State.
The tax system is progressive. 
Article 172. No one can be exempt from paying taxes, except in cases provided by law.
The King and the heir to the throne do not pay taxes. 
Article 173. No pension, relief, or any award whatsoever can be paid by the treasury, unless in cases provided by law. 
Article 174. Every year the National Assembly approves the state budget, which is valid for one year only.
The budget must be presented to the National Assembly at the very beginning of the session. At the same time the National Assembly must be put in possession of rectificative tables of the fiscal year closed. 
All receipts and expenditures of the State must figure in the budget as well as in the rectificative tables.
The Assembly can increase, decrease, or eliminate individual parts of the proposed budget. 
Savings from one budget party cannot be used by another one without approval of the legislative authorities. 
Article 175. If the National Assembly cannot vote on the new before the beginning of the fiscal period, it can apply, provisionally, the budget of the fiscal period just ended, until the adoption of the new budget. 
If the National Assembly is dissolved or prorogued before the vote on the budget, the King can, by a decree signed by all ministers, and with approval of the Council of State, order the application of the budget of the fiscal period just closed for a period of four months at the most. 
Article 176. Ores belong to the State.
Article 177. The State has the right to monopolize. The State can transfer that right, but only through laws, and temporarily.
Concessions are awarded through laws and temporary.  
Article 178. State property consists of all movable and real property, as well as all property rights, which the state obtains and holds as its own. 
State property can be alienated, pledged or encumbered in any other way, only by virtue of law.  
Article 179. The domain of the State is distinct from the private domain of the King, of which he can dispose freely. Article 40 of the second part of this Constitution does not apply to King’s property. 
The King pays expenses for maintaining his property. 
XI. Court of Accounts
Article 180. The Court of Accounts performs audit of the state accounts. It shall be set by law in what cases a complaint can be lodged before the Court of Cassation against a Court of Accounts decision. 
The Court of Accounts consists of the president and four members. Both the president and the Court of Accounts members are elected from the candidate lists, composed by the State Council, including twice the number of candidates as there are vacancies.
Court of Accounts members have the title of “judges of the Court of Cassation,” and the president has the title of “state counselor.”
Article 181. Court of Accounts members shall be Serbian citizens, holding a law degree, obtained either in Serbia or abroad, who have completed ten years of public service; or who have been ministers of finance; or who have completed ten years as high ranking finance officers. However, the president of the Court of Accounts and two of its members must be attorneys.
The president and members of the Court of Accounts who happen to be in service when this Constitution comes into force, can be candidates for the new Court of Accounts, if they fulfill all the requirements.
The president and members of the Court of Accounts are appointed permanently. They cannot be dismissed from public service, without a court of first instance order; nor relocated to another position, without their written consent. They can be retired only after they have completed forty years of public service; or if they are over sixty-five years of age; or if their state of health does not longer permit them to perform their functions.
Article 182. The Court of Accounts performs audit, corrects, and liquidates all state accounts. It ensures that all expenses are in line with the budget, and that no amount is transferred from one budget party to another one. It concludes accounts of state administration, and is required to collect all receipts and relevant notifications. 
The general state account is submitted to the National Assembly with comments from the Court of Accounts, no longer than two years after the end of every budget year. 
A special law shall determine the membership, structure, and authorities of the Court of Accounts.
XII. Public Service
Article 183. All Serbian citizens by birth have equal access to all posts in public service, if they fulfill the requirements prescribed by the law. 
Naturalized Serbian citizens have the right to public service only if they have been residing in the country for at least five years. 
Foreigners, as well as naturalized Serbian citizens who have been residing in Serbia for a period shorter than five years, can join public service, only as contracted officials, and only in cases provided by law. 
Article 184. Public servants shall be appointed and promoted based on their conduct, abilities, and education. Education shall be demonstrated through public service exams, which shall be instituted for all public service posts.
Article 185. All public servants are responsible for the acts committed in performing their functions.
Article 186. Entering public service, public servants take shall take an oath to be loyal to the King, and to perform their duties according to the Constitution and the law.
Article 187. Titles and salaries in public service are determined in accordance with law. 
Article 188. The institution of pension for public servants shall be kept. It shall be set by law what public servants have the right to pension, as well as the conditions under which a public servant can retire. 
Article 189. Children and widow of a late public servant shall be paid pension out of a fund, created by donations from current and retired servants.
XIII. Church, School and Benevolent Institutions
Article 190. The Holy Synod is in charge of the Eastern Orthodox Church’s internal regulations. 
Internal regulations of other religious institutions likewise belong to their respective religious authorities. 
Religious authorities, both of the Eastern Orthodox Church, and of other religions in Serbia recognized by the law, are placed under the authority of the Ministry of Religion. 
Organization of the religious authorities and religious schools of the Eastern Orthodox Church shall be set by law, in agreement with the Holy Synod.  
Article 191. Religious authorities try religious figures for misconduct in performing their religious duties, excluding those instances of misconduct punishable by the criminal code. 
Complaints against abuse of religious authority, of any religion in the country, are brought before the Minister of Religion. 
Religious figures and institutions are, in terms of civil relations and property, subject to earthly laws.
Article 192. Correspondence between authorities of the Serbian Eastern Orthodox Church and religious authorities abroad and synods is subject to approval of the Ministry of Religion.
Correspondence between other religious authorities in Serbia and religious authorities abroad is subject to approval of the Ministry of Religion too.
Correspondence or orders from religious authorities abroad cannot be made public, nor executed without knowledge and approval of the Ministry of Religion.
Article 193. All public and private schools, and other educational institutions are placed under the authority of the State. 
Article 194. Benevolent institutions can, after the passing of their founders, remain active only with approval of the state authorities, in accordance with the law. However, their property cannot be confiscated, nor in any way diverted from the destination, which has been assigned them by their founders. 
Only if it becomes impossible to use the property in the assigned way due to changes in the social and other circumstances, the property can be used for other, similar causes. 
It shall be set by a special law how this shall be done, as well as the rights and duties of the property manager, as well as the procedure of the state supervision over benevolent institutions. 
XIV. The Army
Article 195. Every Serbian is required to serve in the army. 
Length of the military service, the options for performing the military service, and cases of exemption are fixed by a special law. 
This law also determines grades and titles, how those are conferred, and under what circumstances they can be lost.
Article 196. Organization of the military is fixed by a special law, and its formation is determined by way of royal ordinance. 
Article 197. The number of professional soldiers shall be determined every year by the budget law.
Article 198. In penal matters, professional soldiers are tried by courts-martial, in accordance with the military law. 
Provisions regarding military discipline and disciplinary penalties are determined by way of royal ordinance.
Article 199. No one can be admitted into the public service b
Article 200. Foreign soldiers cannot be admitted into the public service. Any treaty authorizing a foreign army to take control of the Serbian territory, or pass through it, is considered invalid without approval of the National Assembly. Likewise, the Serbian army cannot be placed in service of another country without approval of the National Assembly. 
XV. Amendments to the Constitution
Article 201. Amendments to the Constitution can be initiated by the King or the National Assembly.
A constitutional amendment shall include all points of the Constitution that would be amended. 
If an amendment is initiated by the King, the amendment shall be communicated to two National Assemblies, resulting from two consecutive elections; afterwards the Assembly shall be dismissed, and the Grand National Assembly shall be convoked no later than for months later.
If an amendment is, however, initiated by the National Assembly, the Assembly shall vote on it three times, and all votes shall be separated by at least five days. 
Discussing a constitutional amendment requires presence of at least three quarters of the total number of representatives, as established by the Constitution. An amendment shall be considered adopted if as least two thirds of the present representatives vote in favor of it. 
When an amendment is adopted by both Assemblies in this way, the Assembly shall be dismissed, and the Grand National Assembly shall be convoked no later than four months since the adoption of the amendment. 
Either way, the Grand National Assembly can deliberate only upon those constitutional amendments that include the proposal on the basis of which it has been convoked. 
Grand National Assembly’s resolutions become valid only when authorized by the King. 
Article 202. After six years, under exceptional circumstances, and with support of a simple majority of the National Assembly, Articles 89, 90, 91, 92, 93 and 94 of this Constitution can be subject to constitutional revision. 
INTERIM ORDERS
Article 203. 
I. The committee put in charge of drafting the Constitution by the King, shall draft, based on provisions of this Constitution, a temporary election bill, which shall be applied only to the election of representatives for the first extraordinary session of the National Assembly. This bill shall be submitted to the State Council; and shall enter into force when approved by the King. The bill shall be drafted no later than May 1, 1889. 
II. The election for that extraordinary session of the National Assembly shall take place on September 14, 1889; and the National Assembly shall be convoked on October 1 of the same year.
III. The State Council shall remain in its present composition, to perform functions assigned to it by this Constitution, until new members of the State Councils are appointed at the first extraordinary session of the National Assembly, according to provisions of this Constitution (Article 141). The State Council shall keep performing those functions that were assigned to it by the 1869 Constitution, and that were transferred to other institutions by this Constitution, until those new institutions come into force.  
The same applies to members and the president of the Court of Accounts. 
IV. Until new laws are passed as to the regulations of new institutions created by this Constitution, the institutions in force at the time of the promulgation of this Constitution shall keep performing their functions according to provisions of this Constitution.
V. Until a law is passed as to investigative magistrates, Article 9 applies to the present investigative authorities.  
VI. At the first extraordinary session of the National Assembly, after the new administrative organization of the country has been set, and the State Council has been formed according to Article 141 of this Constitution, judges of the Court of Cassation, the Court of Appeals, and courts of first instances shall be appointed the following way:
1) As soon as the State Council has been formed, according to the Constitution, the Council shall create and submit to the King a list of candidates for the president and members of the Court of Cassation;
2) The president and members of the Court of Cassation enter upon their duties, as soon as they have been appointed by the King;
3) The president and members of the Court of Appeals shall be elected and appointed in accordance with this Constitution (Article 155);
4) Presidents of courts of first instance shall be elected the following way: one candidate list shall be created by the State Council, and another one by the Court of Cassation. From those lists, the King appoints judges of individual courts;
5) Members of courts of first instance shall keep their posts, if they fulfill the requirements prescribed by this Constitution and law, and if the court they belong are kept under the new judicial organization. In courts that are kept, preference shall be given to judges of the abolished courts, who fulfill the necessary requirements;
6) Until the new courts are set, present judges shall keep performing their current functions. All judges who lose their posts, shall be given a pension, according to the law on public servants.
VII. All laws shall be reviewed and synchronized with this Constitution. 
VIII. At the first extraordinary session of the National Assembly, scheduled for October 1, 1889, the following laws shall be passed: (1) the law on state budget; (2) the law transferring the judicial powers currently vested in the police to civil courts; (3) the electoral law of the National Assembly; (4) the law on the organization of districts, counties, and municipalities; and (5) the law on the internal regulations of the National Assembly, as well as other laws, which prove to be necessary for this Constitution to enter into force.
During the first term of the National Assembly, the following laws shall be passed: (1) the law on ministerial responsibility; (2) the law on press; (3) the law on associations and public assemblies; (4) the law on internal regulations of the State Council; and the (3) law on internal regulations of the Court of Accounts.
Article 204. After this Constitution goes into effect, all laws and regulations of the June 29, 1869 Constitution, which are contrary to this Constitution are revoked. 
The Council of Ministers shall make this Constitution public through gazettes within twenty-four hours of signing it. 
In Belgrade, on December 21, 1888.
President of the Grand National Assembly
K. S. TAUSANOVIC
Vice-president 
R. S. POPOVIC
SECRETARIES
Rev. Marko Petrovic
A. M. Stanojevic
Sava Ilic
D. Valozic
Rajko L. Stojicevic
Ilija Stosic
Rev. Kosta P. Jovanovic
Ljuba Joksimovic
AUTHORIZED SIGNATORIES
Rev. Tasa Vukosavljevic
Rev. Pera Dj. Popovic
Stojan M. Protic
Rev. Pavle D. Milosevic
Mihailo Savic
Radovan Vlaovic
A. R. Mihailovic
Kosta M. Vlajic
Sava Milicevic
Mladen P. Todorovic
Sp. M. Radosavljevic
Luka Atanackovic
Sp. Stevanovic
Nikola P. Nikolic
Raka Milenkovic	
Milutin Markovic
Pera Tatic
Jova Krsmanovic
Djoka Susic
Milan Nislic
Stevan Ivkovic
Trifun Milojevic
L. Pacu, M.D. 
Anta Nesic  
