Enacted in Kragujevac on the Holiday of Sretenje 1835
I. Dignity and Territory of Serbia
Article 1. Serbia is an indivisible, and independently formed Principality, as recognized by Sultan Mahmud II, and Emperor Nicholas I.
Article 2. Territory of Serbia is divided into districts, and districts are divided into counties and municipalities. Borders and names of districts, counties, and municipalities can be amended in accordance with law.
II. Colors and Coat of Arms of Serbia
Article 3. The national colors of Serbia are red, white, and steel dark.
Article 4. The coat of arms of Serbia is a cross over a red background, with a firesteel in each corner.
The coat of arms is framed by an oak crescent on the right, and an olive crescent on the left.
III. Government of Serbia
Article 5. The government of Serbia consists of three branches: legislative, executive and judicial.
Article 6. The government of Serbia consists of three branches: legislative, executive and judicial.
a) The Prince, and
b) The State Council, made up of six ministers, in charge of the following departments: justice, internal affairs, finance, international affairs, military affairs, education; state counselors, president and secretary of the Council.
IV. Legislation
Article 7. Legislative bodies enact all laws and orders in general, whether they pertain to the whole of people, or a part of it; they control the work of other branches of power and governmental bodies.
Article 8. No law is reversible.
Article 9. The law on tribute is revised annually, and cannot be enacted without approval of the National Assembly, which shall be convoked for this reason annually, and be composed of a hundred of the most meritorious, wisest, and trustworthy deputies. 
Article 10. Every law and order coming from the legislative bodies shall be proclaimed by the State Council in the name of the Prince. 
Proclamation of every law and order shall include the following: 
The Prince of Serbia,
Having conferred with the State Council, hereby concludes the following: 
And the proclamation shall be signed by the president of the State Council, the competent minister, and the general secretary of the Council. 
Laws and orders, which do not fulfill these conditions, shall not be considered valid. 
Article 11. Ministers shall bring before the State Council bills and draft orders relevant to their departments.
Article 12. The State Council shall examine ministerial proposals during its sessions, before submitting them to the Prince. 
Article 13. The Prince shall issue orders regarding proposals from the State Council no later than twenty days since they have been submitted, except in case when the Prince finds it necessary to convoke and confer with the State Council before rendering a decision, which may take longer.
Article 14. The State Council has the right to bring a bill or a draft order before the Prince three times. However, after the third time the Prince shall render his final decision, approving or rejecting the bill or draft order.
V. Prince of Serbia
Article 15. The Prince’s person is holy and inviolable; the Prince is not responsible for any act of governance, the competent ministers are; thus, no one can sue the Prince for the said acts, but shall instead, hold the competent ministries accountable. 
Article 16. Serbian Prince is the head of the state. He has the right to, having conferred with the Council, issue laws and orders and execute them via competitive ministers; and appoint all government officials and public servants. 
Article 17. The Prince has the right of amnesty: he can remit a sentence or grant a pardon.
Article 18. The Prince has the right to bring laws and orders before the State Council, and confer with them regarding the said laws and orders.
Article 19. The Prince has the right to a “Royal Council,” composed of several persons, chosen by the Prince according to their abilities and merit; however, those persons cannot be members of the State Council at the same time.
Article 20. The Prince has the right to bestow medals and title of nobility.
Article 21. The Prince has the right to arrange marriages of his family members in accordance with Article 38 of this Constitution.
Article 22. The Prince and members of his family are exempt for paying taxes on the houses in which they reside; however, they shall pay taxes on their other real estate, like the rest of the people.
Article 23. The Prince shall be succeeded by his first-born son.
Article 24. In case Prince’s first-born son leaves after him no male descendant, he shall be succeeded by his brother, and him, by his own male descendants, in the order of primogeniture. 
Article 25. In case the royal family is left with no male descendant, the Prince shall be succeeded by his first-born daughter’s first-born son.
Article 26. The current Prince, Milos Teodorovic Obrenovic, shall be succeeded in this order, as per Sultan Mahmud II’s berat [diplomatic correspondence]. In case the Prince leaves after him no male descendant, he shall be succeeded by his older brother, Jovan Teodorovic Obrenovic; and in case he is also left without a male descendant, then the throne shall be succeeded by Prince’s younger brother Jefrem Teodorovic Obrenovic. 
Article 27. In case all three, Prince Milos, Jovan and Jefrem Teodorovic, are left without male descendant, the throne shall be succeeded by the oldest daughter of the Obrenovic family, in which case the last living male Obrenovic shall, with approval of the State Council and the National Assembly, adopt the daughter’s first-born son.
Article 28. In case the Royal family is left without either male or female descendant, the State Council of the last living Prince shall advise him to appoint his heir among the people, in accordance with their abilities and merit. 
In case the last living Obrenovic Prince fails to appoint his heir, the State Council and the National Assembly shall chose among themselves the most able and meritorious male, and ask the Sultan to recognize and affirm him the heir of his Royal Highness, in accordance with the berat given to Prince Milos Teodorovic Obrenovic on Rabi' al-awwal [third month] 7, 1246 [of the Islamic calendar]. 
Article 29. Serbian Prince shall be either born or naturalized Serbian of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith. His and wives of members of the royal family shall be of the same faith.
Article 30. Serbian Prince is of age when he attains twenty years.
Article 31. Serbian Prince cannot hold an official position outside of Serbia.
Article 32. Serbian Prince and Princess shall be addressed with “His/Her Highness,” and their children and in-laws with “His/Her Serene Highness.”
Article 33. Minor heir shall study under his mother’s tutorship and those members of the State Council appointed by the Prince in his will. Should the Prince fail to appoint those members, the State Council shall appoint them itself. 
All these tutors of the minor heir take an oath before the State Council to fulfill their duties in good faith and accurately, and raise the minor in accordance with the Constitution and with love for his fatherland. 
Article 34. In case of Prince’s death, or abdication, or minority, the State Council shall appoint three regents to rule in accordance with this Constitution and under the Council’s supervision, before which they take an oath.
The regents take the following oath before the State Council: “I swear, by the holy Trinity, to be faithful to the Prince; to observe the Constitution faithfully in performing royal duties during heir’s minority, and to not make, nor allow, any departures from it; to preserve the unity of the Princedom of Serbia, and defend the general and personal security, and uphold the rights of every Serbian, and look after the general and individual well-being, so help me God!”
Article 35. The Constitution cannot be amended during heir’s minority.
Article 36. Should the State Council and the National Assembly find that King’s first-born son is mentally or physically incapable of succeeding the King, or should he renounce the right to do so, this right is then transferred to his first-born son, or, in case he has none, to the King’s oldest brother.
Article 37. Prince’s sons and brothers do not have the right to join foreign state’s service; should they do this anyway, they shall be stripped of their inheritance, and any other property they would otherwise have the right to.
Article 38. Prince’s sons and daughters of the whole royal family, who, without approval of their parents and the State Council, marry a person not of the Christian Orthodox Faith, thus forfeit the right to inheritance, both for themselves and for their children.
Article 39. Serbian Prince and Princess and their children, and Prince’s brothers and their children, during their lifetime, and after their passing, their families, shall receive annual salary, the amount of which is determined by the State Council every time a new Prince comes to power.
Article 40. Should the Serbian Princess become a widow, she shall receive, until her lifetime, a pension. After her passing, this pension is then transferred to the new Princess, the wife of the ruling Prince.
Article 41. Sons and daughters of the Serbian Prince shall be given a certain amount of money from the people as gift at wedding.
Article 42. Prince Milos Teodorovic Obrenovic shall, during his lifetime, receive an annual salary of one hundred thousand imperial thalers, and additional twenty thousand thalers for maintenance of his court. 
Prince Milos’ brothers, Jovan Teodorvic Obrenovic and Jefrem Teodorovic Obrenovic, shall, during their lifetime, receive an annual pension of ten thousand thalers each; and, after their passing, their families shall receive a five thousand thaler pension.
Article 43. In the capital, courts shall be built to serve as residence for the Prince, at the expense of the whole people.
Courts and other inheritance Prince Milos Teodorovic Obrenovic and his brothers currently own around Serbia rightfully belong to them and their descendants. 
Article 44. Ascending the throne, the Serbian Prince takes the following oath over the holy cross and the holy Gospel: “I swear, by the holy Trinity, to uphold the whole of the Serbian Constitution; to defend the integrity of the Orthodox Christian Church in Serbia; to protect by all means possible the integrity of Serbia, the general freedom of thought, and property rights of every Serbian; and to work to promote and increase the wellbeing of the whole of the Serbian people, and each and every Serbian individually, so help me God!” Following this oath, the Prince shall be anointed.
VI. The State Council
Article 45. The State Council is the highest power in Serbia after the Prince.
Article 46. The State Council shall ensure that no Serbian, of whatever social class, violates the Serbian Constitution.
Article 47. The State Council shall ensure that no Serbian is done wrong; should the State Council find that such injustice has been committed, the State Council shall work jointly with the Prince to correct the injustice.
Article 48. Legislative role of the State Council is to ensure that state affairs are conducted in accordance with legal provisions, and that the Serbian people are ruled in the same way.
Article 49. The State Council shall ensure that other government bodies respect the law; prescribes rules they shall follow in accordance with law, and makes sure they do not break the rules.
Thus, all government bodies, except for the Prince, stand under the authority of the State Council. 
Article 50. The State Council shall supervise affairs, which are not subject to any laws and orders, and make suggestions to the Prince, when it finds that proper laws and orders shall be enacted.
Article 51. The State Council shall advise the Prince on the matters he brings forward.
Article 52. In case of death, abdication, or minority of the Prince, the State Council shall follow Articles 33 and 34 of this Constitution.
Article 53. The State Council has the right to recommend to the Prince individuals suitable for certain positions.
Article 54. The State Council is the means by which the Prince communicates with the people in assemblies, when he is prevented from attending in person.
Article 55. The State Council has the right to accuse before the Prince any member for violating the Constitution, or committing any kind of wrongdoing against the Sultan’s Empire or doing anything at all contrary to the welfare of the Serbian people.
Article 56. The State Council has the right to prosecute any public servant for abusing their office, in accordance with a law, which shall be enacted.
Article 57. In accordance with Article 6 of this Constitution, the State Council consists of the following: 
	a) The President;
	b) Six ministers, in charge of their departments;
	c) State counselors; and
	d) The Secretary.
In addition to them, the Prince has the right to send his sons and brothers above the age of eighteen to attend State Council meetings; however, they cannot express their opinion before they attain twenty years of age. Also, the Prince has the right to appoint other public servants, who do not permanently reside in the capital, state counselors, so that they may attend State Council meetings when they happen to be in the capital, or when invited by the State Council.
Article 58. A father and a son, or two brothers, cannot be members of the State Council at the same time.
Article 59. The Prince appoints the President of the State Council.
Article 60. The role of ministers is to determine and recommend to the State Council laws and orders relevant to their respective department, necessary to the Serbian people.
Article 61. The State Council supervises matters handled by the ministers, for which there are no prescribed laws and orders.
Article 62. The ministers shall strive to ensure that laws and orders approved by the Prince and the State Council and included in the Legal Code, are correctly carried out.
Article 63. The ministers are responsible for all their acts.
Article 64. Every year, each and every minister, shall be given the amount of money necessary for carrying out their duties.   
The ministers shall be held responsible for using the money on the matters assigned to them by law. 
Article 65. Every year, each and every minister shall submit to the Prince and the State Council a detailed report on the performance of their department; in addition, the Minister of Finance shall submit their report to the National Assembly as well.
Article 66. The Prince has the right to appoint members of the State Council ministers, as well as relieve them of their duties; however, ministers, who have been relieved of their duties, join the order of Counselors of the State Council.
Article 67. The Prince has the right to assign a minister two departments; however, department affairs shall be kept separate.
Article 68. State Council meetings are private, and shall not be held without a protocol.
Article 69. Orders of the State Council are considered valid when, in addition to the President, at least four ministers and four State Counselors, along with the Secretary, attended meetings, in which they were issued.
In case of appointing a tutor, or regency for a minor or incapable Prince; a wedding or coronation of a new Prince; taking an oath of loyalty to the Prince or electing a new Prince among the people, at least three quarters of members of the State Council shall be present.
Article 70. Orders of the State Council need receive a simple majority of votes; however, in case of a tied vote, the vote of the President of the State Council determines the end result.
Article 71. Members of the State Council are required to express their opinion openly and truthfully, and not lie about anyone regarding treason against the county; violations of the Constitution; offenses against the Prince, or any other offenses, either in State Council meetings, or before the Prince. Should anyone transgress this, then they themselves shall be prosecuted.
Article 72. State Council members are held responsible: for every advice given to the Prince; for every act committed contrary to the Constitution; for giving a false testimony before the Prince, in order to protect someone else; or for helping a culprit in any other way.
Article 73. In all other cases, State Council members may freely express their opinion regarding laws and orders.
Article 74. Should the Prince or any member of the State Council sue another member of the State Council for their opinion regarding legislature, the said member has the right to request trial from the State Council or his release from the public service, one of which shall be given to them.
Article 75. Each and every State Counselor shall take the following oath before the Prince at ordination: I swear, by the Holy Trinity, to be loyal to the Prince; to respect the law; to uphold the whole of the Constitution; to advise and promote the general wellbeing in accordance to my conscience truthfully; and to carry out the duties assigned to me correctly, so help me God!”
Article 76. Organization and duties of the State Council shall be prescribed by the Prince in a timely manner.
VII. Judiciary
Article 77. Justice shall be administered in the name of the Prince, as has been done so far.
Article 78. Justice shall be administered in the name of the Prince, as has been done so far.
For now, the right to render justice belongs to the following courts:
1) Local courts;
2) The Grand Court of the second instance, serving as the court of appeals; and 
3) The State Council, one part of which shall form a court to serve as the court of the highest instance. 
Article 79. Justice shall be administered uniformly across Serbia, in accordance with the one and only Serbian Legal Code, including both Civil Code and Criminal Code, which shall be issued and given to the courts in a timely manner.
Article 80. In rendering justice, a judge stands under no authority other than the Serbian Legal Code; no government body has the right to order a judge to render justice in any way contrary to law. This provision shall be included in the oath judges take at ordination.
Article 81. No one can be tried by an unsuitable court.
VIII. The National Assembly
Article 82. The National Assembly consists of a hundred of the most meritorious, wisest, fairest, and deputies most deserving of the public trust from the whole of Serbia. 
A law shall be issued regarding how these deputies are to be elected, and the length of their term. 
Article 83. No deputy can be younger than the age of thirty.
Article 84. Deputies attend assemblies at the expense of the unit they represent.
Article 85. The National Assembly is convoked in regular sessions annually, on St. George’s Day. However, the National Assembly can be convoked in extraordinary sessions several times a year, as per Prince’s decree. Likewise, the National Assembly is dismissed by Prince’s decree.
Article 86. No tax can be imposed without approval of the National Assembly.
Article 87. Each and every tax is imposed for a period of one year, after which, the tax shall be revised, and, should the National Assembly find that the tax was not high enough, the tax shall be increased so as to compensate for the previous year’s deficit.
Article 88. The National Assembly shall report annually, or, if required, more often, on state income and expenses.
Article 89. Prince’s annual salary cannot be increased without approval of the National Assembly; nor can it be decreased without Prince’s approval. 
Article 90. The National Assembly has the right to inform the Prince and the State Assembly regarding any issue, and ask them to draft a bill regarding the issue. The National Assembly also has the right to report any abuse of the public office; and, should it notice that members of the State Council, or any other government body, have violated the Constitution, and infringed upon any Serbian’s rights, the National Assembly has the right to apprise the Prince of this.
Article 91. The right to impose a tax belongs solely to the National Assembly.
IX. The Church
Article 92. There is only one Serbian Metropolitan in charge of the Serbian Orthodox Church. 
There can be as many archbishops as necessary.
Article 93. Inner regulations of the Church shall be prescribed by the Metropolitan and any other spiritual authorities appointed by the Patriarch of Constantinople.
Article 94. Both the Metropolitan and the archbishops shall be prescribed an annual salary to be paid from the state treasury.
However, only archbishops have the right to assign parishes to bishops.
Article 95. Clergy shall continue to be paid the same way they have been paid so far, until a law is enacted contrary to this.
Article 96. Clergy cannot hold any other offices in Serbia. Only the Serbian Metropolitan and the Archbishop can advise the Prince or the State Council on religious matters, when asked to do so.
Article 97. Members of each and every religion in Serbia have the right to perform their ceremonies freely, and they shall all enjoy protection of the Serbian government.
Article 98. Should a person required to take an oath belong to a faith other than Eastern Orthodox Christianity, then rules of that person’s faith shall be followed instead.
X. Public Treasury
Article 99. The Public Treasury regulates all income and expenses of the Principality of Serbia.
Article 100. The Public Treasury has no right to collect taxes, other than twice a year: from St. George’s Day to St. Demetrius’ Day; and from St. Demetrius’ Day to St. George’s day.
Article 101. The Public Treasury regulates income from customs, river ferries, fishing, trade, typography, and others that are yet to be prescribed by law.
Article 102. The Public Treasury cannot increase a tax without approval of the National Assembly.
Article 103. The Public Treasury cannot impose, nor collect taxes for anyone’s private need.
Article 104. The Public Treasury cannot take a loan the people’s behalf. However, should this be absolutely necessary, then the State Treasury shall make a recommendation and prove to the Prince, the State Council and the National Assembly that this is, indeed, necessary, and ask for their permission.
Article 105. The Public Treasury is required to come up with ways to increase State income; however, they cannot be at the expense at the people, or contrary to the Constitution.
Article 106. The Public Treasury has no right to impose customs along borders of Serbian districts and counties, but only along borders with foreign countries and pashdoms [administrative unit in the Ottoman Empire].
Article 107. The Prince and the State Council shall appoint the main auditor, who shall audit all accounts of the Public Treasury, and ensure that funds are not spent on any needs, other than those for which they were originally prescribed. 
XI. Rights of Citizenship
Article 108. Every child born in Serbia, or to Serbian parents abroad; every person, who, at the time of the publication of this Constitution finds themselves in Serbian public service, or serving as a catechist; every person who has been residing in Serbia for over ten years, or owns real estate in Serbia, is considered Serbian, and has the right to a Serbian citizenship.
Article 109. Alien merchants, manufacturers, artisans and farmers of the Christian faith, can acquire a Serbian citizenship after they have been residing in the country for a period of seven years, behaving properly; or they can be granted one by the Prince; foreign citizens to whom Serbia is indebted need receive a letter from the Prince regarding their naturalization.
The process of acquiring a Serbian citizenship shall be prescribed by law.
Article 110. Only Serbian citizens can be public servants, tutors, members of society, and supervisors of public and local affairs.
Article 111. Every Serbian is equal before the law.
Article 112. No one in Serbia can be prosecuted, nor deprived of their liberty, except in cases provided by law and by authorities prescribed by it.
Article 113. No one in Serbia can be detained for longer than three days, without being communicated the reason behind his detainment and interrogated.
Article 114. No one in Serbia can be sentenced, except in accordance with law, and by an appropriate court.
Article 115. No one can be tried twice for the same crime.
Article 116. All Serbian citizens have equal right to public service. Serbians have advantage over aliens of equal abilities.
Article 117. Each and every Serbian has the right to choose their calling as they please, as long as it is not contrary to the public wellbeing.
Article 118. Should a slave step on the Serbian territory, they shall become free immediately, regardless of whether they were brought by someone or escaped to Serbia on their own. A Serbian may buy a slave, but they may not sell one.
Article 119. Each and every Serbian’s right to property is inviolable. Should anyone attempt to or successfully appropriate or damage another person’s property, they shall be prosecuted for violating public safety.
Article 120. However, should it become necessary for the Serbian government to appropriate anyone’s property for public needs, it may do so, but only with appropriate compensation, determined by auditors.
Article 121. Each and every Serbian has the right to move to other parts of the Turkish Empire, and abroad; however, in these cases, legal provisions, which are yet to be issued, shall be followed.
Article 122. Each and every Serbian is required to pay taxes in accordance with law, and to contribute financially for public needs, such as building bridges and clearing roads.
Article 123. Each and every Serbian is required to respond to government’s call to arms, either as part of regular, or professional army, the former of which is always at the public expense, and the latter in some cases.
Article 124. No Serbian is required to contribute in workforce to any public servant; however, they may be required to do so at the government’s request in case of building buildings for public use, but, even in this case, they shall be paid a proper wage.
Article 125. No Serbian can join a former country’s public service, nor receive salaries and insignia from them without approval of the Prince.
Article 126. Each and every Serbian has the right to lodge a complaint to a higher authority regarding an order issued by another public authority.
Article 127. All judicial and other state affairs are administered in Serbian.
Article 128. All land belonging to the Serbian people, can be disposed of by their owners. However, authorities shall be notified of all sales of land, so that former owners may not seek to re-occupy the sold land. 
Article 129. Forests are considered a public good; the whole of people has the right to enjoy them. Neither the government; nor any official; or public servant; or peasant; or any Serbian in general, has the right to pollute them, or to prevent others from enjoying them.
Article 130. People to whom the fatherland is indebted are paid in money from the Public Treasury, not in land belonging to any municipality.
Article 131. Municipalities have the right to request that the government set up charitable institutions, schools, hospitals or quarantines for them. However, in those cases, the National Assembly shall determine and approve the necessary expenses.
XII. Public Service
Article 132. Each and every public servant shall be held responsible for all acts committed in the performance of their duties, and for performing correctly all duties prescribed to them by the law.
Article 133. Public servants are appointed by the Prince for lifetime, or as long as they are capable of performing their duties; however, public service is not hereditary.  
Public servants can be called to service in a place other than that where they were first appointed.
Public servants can rise to higher ranks; however, they cannot be brought down to a lower rank, nor fired, except for crimes, for which they have been tried and sentenced by court.
Article 134. However, higher authorities have the right to relieve a public servant of a lower rank of their duties if they are suspected of any wrongdoings. But, the statute of limitations on such wrongdoings is three months, if committed in Serbia, and six months, if committed abroad. 
While a probe is being conducted into such wrongdoings, the public servant shall receive a half of their regular salary, while the other half shall be saved up to cover any damages they may have caused.
Article 135. Should there be a vacancy in public service, responsible authorities shall bring before the State Council all individuals who applied for the position, and give their opinion regarding the three most competent ones. 
Article 136. Travel and moving expenses of public servants shall be paid for by the Public Treasury in accordance with law, in addition to their salary. 
Article 137. Public servants who are too old, or ill, to keep performing their duties, shall be paid a pension from the Public Treasury until they pass. The amount shall be equal to a half of their salary if they have spent fifteen years in public service; or the whole of their salary if they have spent twenty five.
Should a public servant request a release from service before they have acquired the right to a pension, they shall be released from service, but also forfeit the right to a pension.
The Prince and the State Council shall not overlook poor public servants; the law shall look after them.
Article 138. No public servant can own a business under their name.
Article 139. Each and every public servant shall take the following oath before their superiors at ordination: “I swear, by the Holy Trinity, to uphold the Constitution; to carry out all prescribed laws and orders correctly and in a timely manner; to be loyal to the Prince and obedient to the State Council, so help me God!”
XIII. Amendments to the Constitution
Article 140. Should it, over time, become necessary to amend any provisions of this Constitution, add new ones, or take any of the existing ones out, the Prince and the State Council shall convoke the National Assembly to demonstrate this necessity, and then work jointly to make the necessary changes.
Article 141. However, any and all constitutional amendments require at least three quarters of the total number of deputies to be present, and at least two thirds of the present deputies to vote in favor of the amendments.
XIV. Conclusion
Article 142. This Constitution of the Principality of Serbia, with its one hundred and forty two articles, goes into effect, and is included in the Legal Code by the State Council on this day.
In Kragujevac,
On February 3, 1835  
Milos T. Obrenovic,
The Prince of Serbia
On Behalf of His Royal Majesty,
Jefrem Obrenovic
(Followed by signatures of Prince’s brothers, deputies from all counties of Serbia, clergy, and [illegible] of the Serbian Council) 