Sultan’s Firman1
Issued on December 24, 1838
To the Citizens of the Province of Serbia
My vizier Yusuf Muhlis Pasa, and
Prince of the Serbian People Milos Obrenovic
Pursuant to the privileges and freedoms, granted to the citizens of Serbia in recognition of their loyalty and affection, and to my earlier firmans, issued on various occasion, I hereby give the Province of Serbia a national Constitution, under the condition that its citizens continue fulfilling their duties, including but not limited to paying tribute, in the amount which has already been determined and finalized.
Article 1. This Constitution, which I hereby give to the Serbian people, affirms yours,2 and authorities of your family, as outlined in my berat,3 which you have already received.
Article 2. You shall be in charge of the home affairs of the Province, and be given 4,000 bags of the annual revenue for your personal expenses.
Article 3. At the same time, I entrust you with the following duties:
	a) Appointing public officials of the Province;
	b) Implementing laws; 
	c) Regulating the home garrison in charge of policing, and upholding order and peace of the 		Province, in case of any kind of attack or violation
	d) Collecting tribute;
	e) Issuing orders to public officials and servants of the Province, 	as required; and
	f) Carrying out sentences. Moreover, I hereby give you the right 		to remit sentences and grant pardon.
Article 4. Pursuant to the powers entrusted to you, I hereby give you the right to appoint three ministers, one of whom shall be in charge of the Province’s home affairs; another one in charge of finance; and the last one in charge of justice.
Article 5. You shall set up an office, and entrust it to your main deputy, whom you shall instruct to issue passport, and regulate affairs between Serbs and foreign governments.
Article 6. You shall set up a council, composed of the 17 most prominent Serbs, one of whom shall preside over the Council.
Article 7. Those, who are not Serbian by birth, or naturalized Serbian citizens; are below the age of 35; or do not own real estate, cannot be members of the Council.
Article 8. You shall appoint the president and members of the Council on the basis of their prominence, abilities, honor, and contributions to the Province. 
Article 9. Once appointed, members of the Council, and you, shall take an oath before the Metropolitan not to do anything contrary to the interests of the people; duties entrusted to you; your conscience, or my will.
Article 10. The Council shall deliberate over public interests of the people and advise you on various matters.
Article 11. No order can be implemented without approval of the Council.
Article 12. Members of the Council shall receive a salary, the amount of which you shall determine once their duties are finalized. Their responsibilities shall be restricted to the following:
a) Deliberate over and render decisions regarding law and order of the Province, justice, and tribute;
b) Determine salaries of public servants, as well as set up new ranks, if necessary;
c) Calculate annual expenses necessary for running the Province; as well as discuss the most effective and appropriate ways of collecting tribute, which shall be used to cover the expenses; and
d) Draft a bill regarding the membership, salary, and inside regulations of the home garrison, in charge of upholding peace and order.
Article 13. The Council has the right to draft whatever bill it deems necessary and present it to you, signed by the President and Secretary of the Council, under the condition that the bill in no way interferes with my rightful governance of the Province.
Article 14. Decisions of the Council shall be rendered by a simple majority. 
Article 15. The Council has the right to request from the Ministers annually, either in March or April, reports on what they have done during the current year, and to audit their accounts.
Article 16. The Ministers and your Deputy shall attend sessions of the Council, having first taken an oath before the Council.
Article 17. The 17 members of the Council cannot be relieved of their duties until it is demonstrated before me that they have either committed an offense, or broken a law or an order.
Article 18. A kapukahyasi4 shall be elected among the Serbs to reside permanently at my High Porte, and to govern Serbian people’s affairs in accordance with my intentions and orders, and national freedoms of Serbia.
Article 19. The Minister of the Interior shall be in charge of the police, quarantine, issuing orders to the principal authorities, post offices; roads; and carrying out of the home garrison orders.
Article 20. The Minister of Finance shall audit accounts; promote trade; protect and manage public revenues, the amount of which shall be determined by law; ensure that laws regarding trade and finances are carried out; pay for public expenses, based on the reports submitted by the Ministers; make sure that a registry of public and private goods is created, including real estate, ores and forests, and deal with other questions directed at their Office.
Article 21. The Minister of Justice, who is also in charge of the Ministry of Education, shall ensure that sentences have been carried out; receive and resolve complaints against judges; make sure that justice is rendered by those entrusted with it; review reports on all current procedures once every three months; and work to improve prison conditions.
Article 22. The Minister of Justice shall also work to promote public rights; institute new schools and encourage learning in general. Moreover, he shall be in charge of hospitals, and should be put in touch with church representatives, so that they may jointly coordinate all matters regarding the law, worship and the Church. 
Article 23. An alien, who is neither Serbian by birth, nor a naturalized Serbian citizen, cannot be appointed minister.
Article 24. These three ministers shall perform their duties independently of one another, so that no one minister is subordinated to another one.
Article 25. Every ministry shall be divided into several bureaus and sections, and all official correspondence coming from them shall be signed by the person in charge of the bureau or section; no order concerning a bureau can be carried out unless signed by the head of the bureau; and likewise, no order can be carried out unless previously registered by the bureau it concerns.
Article 26. The three ministers shall compile annually, in either March or April, an inventory of everything that has been done in their respective ministries, and bureaus and sections subordinated to them. Signed and sealed, these inventories shall be submitted to the Council for review.
Article 27. It is my personal wish that the citizens of Serbia be protected as to their possessions, persons, honor and dignity; and that no person is stripped off their civil rights without trial, or subjected to any kind of arbitrary prosecution or penalty. In accordance with the public interest, courts of various instances shall be instated in the Province, to ensure that offenders are prosecuted, and that both public and private rights are guaranteed.
Article 28. Accordingly, no Serb can be subjected to either a monetary or corporal punishment, before they are tried and sentenced by court. The courts shall also probe into trade disputes, and interrogate and try offenders, but they can under no circumstance impose a penalty of confiscation of goods. 
Article 29. Children and relatives cannot be held responsible for their parents’ offenses, nor penalized for them.
Article 30. Three types of courts are hereby instituted in Serbia for the purpose of rendering justice. Conciliation Courts shall be instituted in villages and be composed of local elders. Courts of first instance shall be instituted in each of the seventeen districts of Serbia. The Court of Appeals shall be instituted in the capital.
Article 31. The Conciliation Courts shall be composed of one President and two members, elected by locals, and cannot take cases, which are worthy more than 100 groats. Likewise, they cannot execute penalties harsher than 3 days of imprisonment or 10 strokes of cane.
Article 32. The Conciliation Courts can interrogate and try only orally. Only the other two kinds of courts can issue orders in writing. Should a case value run beyond 100 groats, or require a punishment harsher than 3 days of imprisonment or 10 strokes of cane, the case shall be transferred to a court of first instance.
Article 33. The courts of first instance shall be composed of a President, three members, and a sufficient number of scribes.
Article 34. Presidents and members of the courts of first instance cannot be below 30 years of age.
Article 35. The courts of first instance shall investigate and try regular, as well as trade disputes.
Article 36. Deadline to lodge a complaint with the Court of Appeals is eight days following a court of first instance ruling. Should a person fail to submit a complaint within this time period, the ruling shall be considered valid and executed. 
Article 37. The Court of Appeals shall deal exclusively with cases, which have already been tried by a court of first instance. President and four members of the Court of Appeals shall be above 35 years of age.
Article 38. Members of Serbian courts shall be either born Serbian or naturalized Serbian citizens. 
Article 39. When transferring a case from one court to another, the President of the former shall provide the prosecutor and defense attorney of the latter with all the necessary paperwork, signed and sealed by them. 
Article 40. Members of the Conciliation Courts cannot be members of the other two kinds of courts.
Article 41. Should a member of either a court of first instance or the Court of Appeals pass away, their replacement shall be elected on the basis of seniority among attorneys already working at one of the courts.
Article 42. No court member can discharged for stepping over their duties, until their guilt has been proven in court. 
Article 43. Proven guilty, neither army, nor civil officials can be sentenced to a corporal punishment; they can only receive reprimand or a prison sentence.
Article 44. State officials cannot interfere with the work of courts; they can only take part in the sentence execution.
Article 45. There are no restrictions on trade in Serbia: every Serb can engage in trade freely, and this right shall be guaranteed as far as the Prince, in accordance with the Council, does not find it necessary to impose trade restrictions. 
Article 46. Every Serb has the right to sell their property, dispose of it as they please, and bequeath it.
Article 47. This right can only be restricted by a court ruling.
Article 48. A Serb may lodge a complaint only with the court of the district, in which they reside. Likewise, a Serb may be summoned only by the court of the district, in which they reside. 
Article 49. Corvée is forbidden in Serbia. 
Article 50. Expenses of maintaining bridges and roads shall be paid by the nearby villages.
Article 51. As the central government is required to maintain major roads, bridges and public buildings in general, so private persons shall be aware that their attention is required in this matter.
Article 52. You shall, in agreement with the Council, determine the amount of money paid to those engaged in these, and other public works.
Article 53. Every public servant has the right to request discharge after several years of completed service; they shall be paid a pension they deserved.
Article 54. Every title, be it civil, army or judicial, shall be bestowed by a decree from the Prince; every government official shall enter public service at a lower level and then progressively advance to higher ones. 
Article 55. Judges cannot change their profession, nor work anywhere other than in courts; they are allowed to work exclusively in their field of specialization. 
Article 56. No government official, civil or army, can be, even temporarily, appointed in court.
Article 57. Given that Serbs, tribute paying subjects of the High Porte, are of the Eastern Orthodox Faith, I hereby grant the Serbian people right to practice their religion freely, and to choose among themselves, in accordance with their will, and under your supervision, their metropolitans and bishops, provided that they are spiritually subordinated to the Patriarch of Constantinople, who is considered the head of this synod. In accordance with rights and freedom given to Christians throughout the Ottoman Empire, clergy has the right to administer church affairs (as long as they do not interfere with politics), metropolitans, bishops, priors and staff of religious institutions, related to the church, are funded by the people, in amounts that they deem appropriate; this shall also be applied to religious authorities and institutions in Serbia. 
Article 58. The Metropolitan, bishops and priests shall be provided spaces where they may hold meetings, related to church affairs.  
Article 59. The timar 5 system has been abolished in Serbia, and may not be reinstated. 
Article 60. Every Serb is required to pay tribute. Serbian officials in state service shall pay tribute in accordance with their salary and the amount of land they own. Only clergy is exempt for paying tribute.
Article 61. As Serbia is composed of 17 districts, and each district consists of several counties, which again include multiple villages, so every district chief shall have an assistant, a scribe, a treasurer and others, as required.
Article 62. District chiefs shall be in charge of carrying out instructions coming from the central government related to all home affairs; they shall not interfere with the process of collecting tribute, which belongs to the Ministry of Finance; they may, however, transfer cases to district courts, and take part in sentence execution. 
Article 63. District chiefs shall work to defend villages’ property and land from every kind of attack, and to protect the people from the malignant, landloupers and the debauched. 
Article 64. District chiefs shall inspect passports of all those entering or leaving their district.
Article 65. District chiefs may not keep anyone imprisoned for over 24 hours; they may, however, transfer cases to their respective district court and, contact district police chief, if required. Moreover, they shall supervise the work of the Conciliation Courts, and be careful not to interfere with the work of the Church and village schools. For all goods and property, belonging to either public entities or private persons, deeds shall be issued and recorded at the Registry.
Article 66. No Serb can be prosecuted or harassed, neither in secret, nor in public, before they have been summoned to defend themselves in court.
Having drafted the above-provisions in accordance with my will, I have created this firman, and sent it to you by my royal carriage. I hereby command: protect the security of the Principality I put you and your family in charge of, under the condition that you obey my orders; use the authorities given to you to enhance the Principality’s welfare, and the tranquility and peace of its citizens; moreover, I command you to respect everyone’s state, honor, title and service; ensure that the above-provisions are implemented in their entirety, using all your zeal to acquire me prayers and blessings of citizens of all classes, and thus justify the royal trust vested in you. I command all Serbs in general to submit to all your commands, in accordance with the Constitution and laws. I command that this firman be made public, so that the people are aware of my bestowals and blessings and may command themselves so as to deserve my approval, and that every provision of this Constitution may be carried out correctly.
I expect you too, my vizier, to direct all your powers toward the correct and strict execution of this firman. 
1 A royal mandate or decree issued by a sovereign in the Ottoman Empire.
2 Second person singular imperative, directed at Prince Milos Obrenovic.
3 A form of diplomatic correspondence in the Ottoman Empire.
4 A representative of a foreign ruler at the Ottoman Porte. 
5 In the Ottoman Empire, within the Timar system, conquered territory was distributed in the form of temporary land grants among the military class, as compensation for annual military service, for which they received no pay.  