I. THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT, STATE RELIGION, AND TERRITORY OF THE KINGDOM
Article 1. The Kingdom of Serbia is a hereditary, constitutional monarchy, with a parliamentary government. 
Article 2. The coat of arms of the Kingdom of Serbia is a double-headed white eagle on a red shield, with a royal crown. The royal crown rests on both heads of the eagle, and there is a fleur-de-lis in each claw. There is the coat of arms of the Principality of Serbia on the eagle’s breast, with a white cross over a red background, and a firesteel in each corner.  
The national flag is a tricolor of red on top, blue in the middle, and white on the bottom. 
Article 3. The state religion of Serbia is Eastern Orthodox Christianity.
The Orthodox Church of the Kingdom shares the dogmatic unity of the Universal Eastern Church; it is independent and autocephalous. 
Article 4. The state territory of Kingdom can be neither alienated, nor divided. It can be neither diminished, nor can parts of it can be exchanged, without approval of the Parliament.
II. THE KING
Article 5. The King is the head of the State. He holds all the rights that derive from this supreme authority, and exercises them according to provisions of this Constitution. 
The person of the King is inviolable.
Article 6. In Serbia, King Alexander I, of the Obrenovic dynasty, reigns. All royal rights, asserted multiple times through national resolutions, are hereditary within His Dynasty. 
The King is succeeded by his descendants in the following way: 
King’s male descendants from legitimate marriage, in the order of primogeniture. 
If the King leaves after him no male descendant, he is succeeded along the collateral line; if there are no male collateral relatives within the House of Obrenovic, the King is succeeded by his immediate female descendant, from his legitimate marriage. 
A special law on succession to the throne will contain further provisions regarding this matter.
Article 7. The King and His children must be of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith.
Article 8. The King is the head of the Royal House. He will outline the organization of the Royal House in a special statute, which he will communicate to the Parliament.  
Article 9. The King cannot reign over any other state, without approval of the Parliament. 
Article 10. The King holds executive power. 
He appoints and dismisses ministers. 
He approves and promulgates laws.  
Article 11. The King cannot be held responsible. 
Every royal decree related to state affairs has to be countersigned by a competent minister, who thus assumes responsibility for it; a decree related to awarding medals and other state insignia may also be countersigned by the chancellor of the royal insignia. 
Article 12. The King is the commander-in-chief of all military forces of the country.
He bestows military titles, in accordance with provisions of the law. 
Article 13. The King represents the country in foreign affairs. 
He declares war and executes peace treaties, treaties of alliance, and others; he communicates them to the Parliament, when, and if, permitted by state interests.
Approval of the Parliament is mandatory for treaties of commerce, as well as all other treaties, the execution of which would involve an expenditure at the expense of the public treasury; a modification of existing laws; or limiting of public or private rights of Serbian citizens.  
Article 14. The King appoints all state officials. 
All state functions are performed on His behalf. 
He awards medals and other state insignia, in accordance with the law. 
He has the right to have money coined, in accordance with the law. 
He has the right of amnesty in political matters. 
He has the right of amnesty; however, this does not cancel the judgment altogether in civil proceedings. 
Article 15. The King convokes ordinary and extraordinary sessions of the Parliament. Constituted, the Parliament is presented to the King, both houses at the same time.   
The King opens and closes sessions of the National Assembly personally, by a discourse from the throne, or by a message, or a decree, countersigned by all ministers. The National Assembly responds to the discourse from the throne with an address. 
The King has the right to continue a session of the Parliament; however, without approval of the Parliament, such continuance may not be renewed in the same session, nor extended to duration of more than two months.  
The King has the right to dissolve the Parliament. The act of dissolution must be countersigned by all the ministers. At the same time, it must also order new elections to be held within three months at the latest, as well as the convocation of the new Assembly, within a period of four months. 
The King closes sessions of the Parliament, by a discourse from the throne, or by a message, or a decree, countersigned by all the ministers. 
A regular session of the Parliament may be closed, only after it has formally been opened. 
Article 16. When temporarily absent from the country, the King decides, by a proclamation or a decree, who will be exercising the royal executive power in his absence. 
Article 17. The King’s civil list is determined in accordance with the law. Once determined, the list may not be changed without King’s approval. 
Article 18. The King and the heir to the throne are considered legally adult at the age of 18. 
Article 19. In case of King’s death, the heir to the throne, if legally adult, takes over the royal power immediately, as a constitutional monarch, and announces his accession to the throne by a proclamation. 
He then convokes the Parliament, within ten days of his accession to the throne, at latest, to be sworn in before the Parliament, according to the Constitution. 
If the Parliament has been dissolved, and the new one has not been elected yet, the previous Parliament is convoked to perform this duty. 
All this also applies in case, when the heir to the throne, a minor at the death of the King, becomes legally adult, and takes over the royal power. 
Article 20. The oath that the King takes before the Parliament goes as follows:
“I (name), swear by the Almighty God, that I will watch over the independence and integrity of the Kingdom; that I will uphold intact people’s rights; and that in all my acts and aims, I shall have in view the people’s welfare. So help me God!”
Article 21. If, at the death of the King, the heir to the throne is a minor, the royal power, delimited by the Constitution, shall be exercised, until he is legally adult, by the widowed Queen, on his behalf. In case there is no Queen, the regent shall be that legally adult male member of the Royal House, who comes first in the line of succession. 
In both cases, the regent shall announce to the people, by a proclamation, that he has taken over exercising the royal power, and at the same time, he shall convoke the Parliament, within ten days of the King’s death, at the latest, or when he takes over the royal power, so that he can be sworn in.
Regarding convoking the Parliament, if the National Assembly has been dissolved, the steps outlined in Article 19 of this Constitution shall be followed. 
Article 22. If there is no one within the Royal House, who could take over exercising the royal power according to Article 21 of this Constitution, the King has the right to name a Council of Regency to the minor heir to the throne, composed of three persons. In case the King has not done so, the royal power shall be exercised by the Council of Ministers, and it shall, within ten days of King’s death, at the latest, convoke the Parliament for a joint session, under the President of the Council, who, in that case becomes the first Regent, in order to choose additional two regents among prominent Serbian state officials. 
If, due to the minority of a member of the Royal House, who would have the right to become a regent, the royal power is handed over to regents among the prominent state officials, their regency ceases the moment the member of the Royal House becomes legally adult. 
In case the Parliament has been dismissed, the steps outlined in Article 19 of this Constitution shall be followed.
If the members of the Council of Regency were chosen by the King, the Council shall be sworn in before the Parliament, as outlined in Article 21 of this Constitution; in case that the Council members were chosen by the Parliament, the Council shall be sworn in before the Parliament immediately. 
Article 23. In the case that the King leaves after him no descendant, and the Queen is pregnant at the death of the King, the royal power shall be exercised by a temporary regency, composed of the President of the Senate, President of the State Council, and President of the Court of Cassation, until she gives birth. In that case, the temporary regency shall follow the steps outlined in Article 21 of this Constitution.
Article 24. While the King is a minor, no changes can be made to the Constitution, nor can any amendments to the Constitution be considered. 
III. CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF SERBIAN CITIZENS
Article 25. All citizens are equal before the law. 
It is forbidden to grant titles of nobility to Serbian citizens, or recognize them.
Article 26. Individual freedom is guaranteed by the present Constitution. 
No one can be subjected to an examination [by the public authority], except in cases provided by the law, and in the forms prescribed by it. 
No one can be placed in a state of arrest, nor be deprived in any other manner of their liberty, except by virtue of a written warrant with reasons therefore from the examining magistrate. This warrant must be communicated to the person arrested at the very moment of arrest. Only culprits surprised in flagrante delicto can be arrested without any prior warrant, but even then a written report shall be drawn up and communicated to him within twenty-four hours from the moment of arrest.
The person arrested has the right to lodge a complaint before the tribunal of first instance against the warrant concerning his arrest. If he does not make use of this right within three days from the communication of the warrant to bring him, or the report of the arrest, the examining magistrate is be obliged to transmit officially the papers in the case to the competent tribunal within twenty-four hours following the expiration of the first period. 
The tribunal is then required to pronounce the maintenance or the annulling of the arrest within a new period of twenty-four hours. Decision of the tribunal on these questions become executory immediately; however, an amended complaint may be lodged before the Court of Cassation. 
Agents of the public authority, who have infringed on these provisions, shall be punished for illegal attempt at deprivation of liberty. 
Article 27. No one can be tried by an incompetent tribunal.
Article 28. No one can be tried without being previously examined by the competent authority, or invited in the legal way to defend himself. 
Penalties cannot be established except by law, nor applied except to subsequent acts formally provided for by law.
Article 29. The penalty of death may be used only in cases for a first-degree murder, banditry, regicide, assassination of a member of the Royal House; and in cases for which the military law prescribes this penalty. 
Article 30. Private domicile is inviolable. 
The public authority cannot proceed to any domiciliary visit except in the cases provided for by law, and following the forms prescribed by it.
After the domiciliary visit has been made, the authority is required to send the interested party a written report stating: the objects which have been seized (if any); who performed the visit, and pursuant to whose order. 
Article 31. Property of every kind is inviolable.
No one can be constrained to yield his goods to the State or to other public moral persons, nor to undergo any restriction in their favor, except in cases established by law and in consideration of a legal indemnity.      
Article 32. The penalty of confiscation of property is forbidden.
However, objects arising from a fraudulent source, or objects having served or destined to serve in the accomplishment of a crime can be confiscated.      
Article 33. Liberty of conscience is absolute. All recognized religions are placed under the protection of the law, so far as their celebration does not infringe upon the public order or morals. 
Every act that can infringe upon the State religion (proselytism) is forbidden.
Serbian citizens cannot take advantage of religious precepts, with a view to avoid the fulfillment of their duties as citizens and soldiers.      
Article 34. Every Serbian has the right to express freely his thought, while conforming to the prescriptions of the law. Censorship is forbidden.
Article 35. The privacy of letters and telegraphic dispatches is inviolable; except in time of war, and in the case of criminal inquiry. 
A law shall determine what government agents are responsible for the violation of the privacy of letters and dispatches, and how such violations shall be prosecuted.
Article 36. Serbian citizens have the right to meet peacefully and without weapons, if they conform to the law. The authorities shall be advised of meetings in a closed place. Meetings in the open air are subject to special laws and regulations, and may not be held without permission from the authorities. 
Article 37. Serbian citizens have the right to associate themselves for purposes, which are not contrary to the Constitution and the law. 
Article 38. Every Serbian has the right of petition.
Article 39. Every Serbian has the right to bring complaint against illegal actions of the authorities. 
If a superior authority rejects the complaint as being ill-founded, it is required, in communicating its decision to the complainant, to indicate the reasons therefore. 
If the superior authority fails to communicate the decision to the complainant within a certain timeframe, it will be assumed that the complaint has been rejected, and the complainant has the right to bring complaint before a higher competent authority.
Every Serbian has the right to enter a judicial suit, without any previous authorization, against state officials, and authorities of self-government, who have injured his rights in the exercise of their power.
Special provisions are applicable in this regard to ministers, judges, and professional soldiers. 
Article 40. Aliens living in Serbia are placed under protection of Serbian laws, as to their persons and their possessions. But they are compelled to pay imposts and other charges for the benefit of the State, unless exempted by international treaties.
Article 41. Extradition is forbidden in the matter of crimes purely political.
Article 42. The procedures for obtaining and forfeiting a Serbian citizenship are regulated under a special law. 
IV. THE PARLIAMENT
A. General provisions
Article 43. The King is in charge of legislation, along with the Parliament.
The Parliament is composed of the National Assembly and the Senate.
Elections for the National Assembly are held on May 21, and elections for the Senate are held on September 8.
No one can be a member of both the Assembly and the Senate at the same time.
Every member of the Parliament represents the whole people.
Article 44. The Parliament is convoked yearly for a regular session held in the capital of the Kingdom of Serbia, no later than October 1. 
A parliamentary session can be convened outside the capital only in case of war. 
Article 45. The Assembly and the Senate hold their meetings and render decisions separately, unless otherwise prescribed by the Constitution. 
Article 46. Powers of members of the both houses are regulated during general sessions of the Court of Cassation.
Article 47. Only the King and the Parliament can propose a new law. The Government, on the King’s behalf, brings proposals before the National Assembly first. 
The Government, as well as members of the Parliament can revoke their proposal, before a final decision is rendered about them. 
Article 48. No law can be promulgated, abrogated, modified, or interpreted, either in part or as a whole; nor can an amendment be brought before the King, before it has been adopted by both the National Assembly and the Senate, by a majority of votes. 
Article 49. Laws and law provisions, which have been promulgated in accordance with the law, are mandatory for all citizens and state authorities. No one other than the Parliament can render decisions regarding whether the Parliament took part in promulgating a law in the way prescribed by the Constitution. 
When promulgating a law, it shall be stated that it has been adopted by the Parliament; when promulgating a resolution or an order, it shall be stated what legal provisions they are based on. 
Article 50. In order to be able to elect members of the National Assembly belongs to those, one must fulfill the following conditions: to be Serbian born, or a naturalized Serbian citizen; over 21 years of age; to pay the State at least 15 dinars direct taxes per annum; and to not have been deprived of the voting right by a court ruling. 
Senators are elected by those citizens, who fulfill the above-outlined conditions, and pay the State at least 45 dinars direct taxes per annum. 
Tribunals of first instance rule on whether one has the electoral right in accordance with the Constitution and the law. They will also be in charge of regulating the electoral roll.
The amount of taxes paid to the State is based on tax booklets for the past three years. 
Article 51. Military officers and professional soldiers can neither vote, nor be elected.
Article 52. The election law determines in what cases one is deprived of their voting right. 
Article 53. Members of the Parliament, after their powers have been authorized, take the following oath: 
“I [name] swear, by the one and only God, to observe faithfully the Constitution, and to have, in the accomplishment of my mission as deputy, constantly in view the common good of the King and of the nation. May God be to me help in this world and in the other.”
This oath is taken before a priest, in a courthouse, and a written copy of it is preserved in the archives of the Parliament. 
Article 54. The National Assembly chooses among its members, for each session, a president, two deputy-presidents, and the necessary number of secretaries. The Senate chooses its secretaries among its own members, for each session. 
Article 55. Both houses can pass a resolution, regarding their own formation, as well as others, only if more than a half of the number of the deputies provided by the Constitution is present. For a resolution to be valid, it has to receive the majority of votes of the deputies present, unless otherwise specified in the Constitution. In case of a tie vote, the proposition, which is the subject of the vote, is rejected. 
Voting can be done in person only.
Article 56. A proposition rejected by either the Senate or the Assembly may not be presented again, during the same session. 
Article 57. Both houses have the right of inquiry in electoral, as well as purely administrative questions. Every member of each house has the right to address questions and interpellations to ministers. The ministers must respond thereto before the close of the session. 
Article 58. Everyone has the right to address petitions and complaints to both houses. Only members of the Assembly and the Senate, ministers, and government commissioners have the right to speak during sessions. Neither the Assembly, nor the Senate, can receive delegations, or deputies, nor allow anyone, other than the above-listed persons, to speak during their sessions. 
Article 59. No one can at any time demand account of a member of either house for his opinion, or a vote, which he has cast, as a member of the Parliament.
For the duration of their mandate, no member of either house can be demanded account, nor arrested on any charges, without the previous authorization of the house of which he is a member. 
This does not apply when a deputy is caught in flagrante delicto on charges, which call for an arrest. But, even in this case, the deputy’s house is advised of the incident, and shall give or refuse authorization to prosecute the affair.  
Article 60. Both the Assembly and the Senate have the exclusive right to maintain order within themselves through their presidencies. 
No armed force can penetrate within the locality of the People’s Presidency. 
No armed person can penetrate within the locality of the People’s Presidency, except those, whose profession obliges them to carry arms, and who are called within the Presidency on Presidency-related matters. 
Article 61. Both houses are in direct relations only with ministers.
Article 62. A proposition adopted by one house is sent to the other house for deliberation. If the other house approves the proposition, without any amendments, the proposition is considered adopted by the Parliament. 
However, if one of the houses makes any amendments to the proposition, which has been adopted by the other house, the amended proposition is sent back to the house, which originally adopted it. If that house rejects the amended proposition, the proposition is sent again to the other house for the final consideration. If there is still no agreement, the proposition is considered rejected, and may not be presented again, before either house, during the same session.
A proposition rejected by either house upon the first deliberation may not be presented before the other house. 
The National Assembly renders the final decision on the public budget after its second deliberation, in case the Senate makes any amendments 
Article 63. During their work at the Parliament, members of both houses get paid fifteen dinars per day. In addition, presidents of the Senate and the Assembly receive five thousand dinars per year.
Article 64. Rules of Conduct for both houses will be determined by a special law.
B. The National Assembly
Article 65. The National Assembly is composed of deputies freely elected by the people, conformably to the provisions of the present Constitution, and the election law. 
There are 130 national deputies. 
Two deputies are elected in Belgrade, whereas one deputy is elected in the surrounding towns, including the municipalities of Takovo and Dobrinje. The remaining deputies are elected per district. A district has the right to establish a list of candidates, in accordance with its size. Each list must include at least one candidate, who has completed their university education, either in Serbia or abroad. Other propositions are prescribed by the law. 
Article 66. Deputies are elected directly, and voting is kept secret. 
Article 67. To be named deputy to the National Assembly, it is necessary to fulfill the following conditions: 
a) To be Serbian born, or a naturalized Serbian citizen; 
b) To enjoy all civil and political rights;
c) To be over 30 years of age;
d) To reside permanently in Serbia;
e) To be literate;
f) To pay the State at least 60 dinars direct taxes per annum, as demonstrated by tax booklets for the past three years. 
All attorneys, as well as those who completed their university education in Serbia or abroad, may be elected, even when paying 30 dinars direct taxes per annum. 
Article 68. Below are the conditions, which disqualify an individual from running for deputy to the National Assembly:
a) Those, who do not have the right the vote, cannot be elected deputy;
b) Those are active officials; except for members of the Court of Cassation, the President and members of the Court of Accounts, President of the Appellate Court, professors of the University and high schools, head of the Monopoly, librarians of the Public Library, physicians, engineers, and those officials, either available or retired, who have completed university education; 
c) Mayors; and 
d) Priests, belonging to both orders.
Article 69. A deputy’s mandate is four-years long. 
A deputy forfeits the right to his mandate by accepting a paid state service, permanent or temporary; as well as by getting a promotion, if he is already an official. 
Those deputies, who forfeited the right to their mandate in the above-outlined way, may be elected again, should their new position allow for this. 
C. The Senate
Article 70. The Senate consists of the heir to the throne, of adult age; the Archbishop of Belgrade; the Bishop of Nis; and the following individuals:
a) Thirty members appointed by the king for a life-time;
b) Eighteen members, one of whom is elected in Belgrade; and the rest of whom are elected in the remaining electoral districts, which will be determined in accordance with the law. 
Senators take an oath, just as members of the National Assembly do. 
Article 71. An elected deputy’s mandate is six-years long. Deputies are elected directly, and voting is kept secret. 
Article 72. To be named senator, it is necessary to fulfill the following conditions: 
a) To be Serbian born, or a naturalized Serbian citizen; 
b) To enjoy all civil and political rights;
c) To reside permanently in Serbia;
d) To be over 40 years of age;
e) To pay the State at least 200 dinars direct taxes per annum, as demonstrated by tax booklets for the past three years. 
The following citizens need not fulfill the condition e): citizens, who were presidents or vice-presidents of the National Assembly; retired or inactive generals; former ministers, advisors, associate deputies, and diplomats. 
Article 73. Active public servants cannot be senators, except for associate deputies, diplomats, and those who can be elected deputies to the People’s Assembly, in accordance with Article 68 of the Constitution. 
Active military officers cannot be elected senators; they cannot be elected senators either, except for generals. The maximum of four generals can be elected to the Senate.  
Priests belonging to both orders can be elected to the Senate.  
Article 74. A public servant, who is a senator, cannot be retired, without his own approval, before the age of 70, except if he has completed 40 years of public service, or is prevented from holding his office due to an illness. 
Article 75. The Senate is convoked at the same tame as the People’s Assembly; and the Senate’s work is continued at the same time as the work of the People’s Assembly. 
The Senate is never dismissed.
V. MINISTERS
Article 76. At the head of the Public Service is the Council of Ministers, placed immediately under the authority of the King. The King appoints one of them the President of the Council. The President can be without portfolio. 
Upon entering upon their duties, the ministers take the oath of obedience and of fidelity to the King and swear to observe conscientiously the Constitution and the laws.  
Article 77. No member of the Royal House can be appointed minister.
Article 78. Ministers have access to both houses of the Parliament. Both houses are required to hear the ministers whenever they request so. 
Ministers cannot be deputies to the National Assembly, nor can they be elected senators.
A deputy to the National Assembly, or a minister, forfeits their mandate by being elected minister. 
Article 79. Ministers are responsible to the King and to the National Assembly for all acts done in the exercise of their functions. 
An order of the King, either written or oral, cannot in any case cover the legal responsibility of a minister.  
Article 80. The King, as well as the Parliament, has the right to impeach a minister:
a) For treason against the country and the sovereign;
b) For violation of the Constitution and of the constitutionally-guaranteed rights of Serbian citizens; 
c) For receiving a bribe; 
d) For violation of the laws specified later by a special law on ministerial responsibility;
Statute of limitations for these offenses is five years. 
Article 81. In order for a proposal to impeach a minister to be taken into consideration, it must be signed by at least 20 members of the People’s Assembly.
An impeachment may be pronounced if at least two thirds of the total number of deputies vote in favor of this. 
Once rejected, a proposal to impeach a minister for the same offense may not be re-considered. 
Ministers are tried by the Senate.
Special stipulations regarding ministerial responsibility will be determined by a separate law.  
Article 82. Without approval of the People’s Assembly, the King may neither grant amnesty to, pardon, or reduce sentence for a sentenced minister; nor can he stop investigation, or prevent conviction. 
VI. THE COUNCIL OF STATE
Article 83. The Council of State is composed out of 15 members, chosen by the King, out of deputies nominated by the Senate. 
Article 84. Members of the Council of State enter the category of functionaries of the State. Functionaries of the State cannot be relieved of their functions, nor called to another employment within the public administration, without their consent. They retire at the age of 70. They can also retire once they have completed 40 years of service; when their state of health does not longer permit them to perform their functions; or at their own request.
If a member of the Council of State is appointed minister, no provision is made for his replacement in the Council of State; and, when he ceases to be minister, he returns to his post as councilor of State.
Only in the case that the number of members of the Council of State drops below the number fixed by the internal regulations of the Council of State, necessary for its deliberations to have full and entire effect, provision shall immediately be made for as many vacancies as are necessary so that the Council of State can hold its sessions. 
Article 85. The Council of State has the following duties:
1) To determine on complaints against decrees, by which legitimate private rights are injured. The Court of Accounts has the right of recourse, in the name of the state, if, by public decree, material interest of the state are injured to the profit of individuals. 
2) To determine on complaints against ministerial decisions in administrative matters. Decisions rendered by the Council of State on this subject are obligatory for the minister. 
3) To determine on complaints against ministerial decisions, rendered by the minister in matters for which the minister was not competent or which went beyond the province of the authority, which is attributed to him by the law. Decisions rendered by the Council of State on this subject are obligatory for the minister.
4) To determine upon conflicts of powers between administrative authorities. 
5) To determine upon surtaxes on the level of districts, counties, and municipalities; and whether the surtaxes surpass the amount determined by administrative authorities in accordance with the law. Likewise, the Council of State determines upon the borrowing of districts, counties, and municipalities.
6) To approve sales and alienation in general of real estate belonging to districts, counties, and municipalities. 
7) To determine upon removing from inventory those amounts, which cannot be reimbursed.
8) To approve compromises between the State and individuals, which shall be found advantageous for the State.
9) To determine whether there is occasion according to the law to pronounce expropriation for the purpose of public use.
10) To determine upon exceptional cases of admission to Serbian naturalization;
11) To approve partial expenditures on general credits, included in the budget for extraordinary needs, as well as detailed application of the credit granted for public works, insofar as these expenses exceed the sum of which the minister himself can legally dispose. 
12) To perform functions attributed to it by different laws of the country.
Article 86. Internal regulations of the Council of State shall be fixed by a special law. 
VIII. THE TRIBUNALS
Article 87. Justice is rendered in accordance with the law, and in the name of the King.
The tribunals are independent in rendering justice.
Judicial organization and competence are determined by a special law, in accordance with the independence and irremovability of judges.
No tribunal whatsoever can be instituted, nor anything whatever be created in point of judicial organization and competence, unless a law is passed to this effect.
An investigation or a trial in progress cannot be abolished in non-political cases. 
IX. FINANCES OF THE STATE
Article 88. Every Serbian citizen is required to pay taxes to the State.
No one can be exempt from paying taxes, except in cases provided by the law.The King and members of the Royal House do not pay taxes. 
Article 89. No pension, relief, or any award whatsoever can be paid by the treasury, unless in cases provided for by the law. 
Article 90. Each year the Parliament approves the budget of the State, which is valid for one year only.
The budget must be presented to the National Assembly at the very beginning of the session. At the same time the National Assembly must be put in possession of rectificative tables of the fiscal year closed. All receipts and expenditures of the State must figure in the budget as well as in the rectificative tables.
No tax regulation can be changed, nor instituted, without approval of the Parliament.
Likewise, the economies realized on certain credits allowed to one part or to one year of the budget cannot be transferred to another part or year, unless approved by the Parliament. 
Once adopted by the National Assembly, the budget is presented to the Senate.
Article 91. The Parliament cannot augment credits proposed by the budget bill.
Article 92. The Parliament cannot reject the budget bill in principle; nor can it remove from the budget expenditures, which have been included in accordance with the law.
Article 93. If the Parliament cannot vote on the new before the beginning of the fiscal period, it can apply, provisionally, the budget of the fiscal period just ended, until the adoption of the new budget. 
If the National Assembly is dissolved or prorogued before the vote on the budget, the King can, by a decree signed by all ministers, and with approval of the Council of State, order the application of the budget of the fiscal period just closed for a period of one year at the most. 
Article 94. The State cannot take a loan, without approval of the Parliament.
The government is required to present to the Parliament a detailed report on the conclusion and execution of contracts, and to get a clearance from the Parliament.
The accuracy of this report is verified by the Court of Accounts.
Article 95. It is only by virtue of a law that property of the State domain can be alienated or hypotheticated, or their revenues engaged, or encumbered with other charges. 
The domain of the State is distinct from the private domain of the King, of which he can dispose freely.
IX. THE COURT OF ACCOUNTS
Article 96. The Court of Accounts is instituted in view of the control of the deposit expenses and accounts of the different services of the State, counties, districts, and municipalities. 
The Court of Accounts functions as an independent body, with its organization prescribed by law.  
X. MUNICIPALITIES
Article 97. Municipalities are autonomous with regards to their internal matters.
The extent of their self-government shall be prescribed by law.
XI. RELIGION
Article 98. All religious authorities in the Kingdom are under supervision of the Ministry of Religion. 
The organization of religious authorities shall be determined by a law, created with the Synod’s opinion in mind.
The administration of internal affairs of foreign religions [other than Eastern Orthodox Christianity] belongs to their competent spiritual authorities, whereas in other matters, they are under supervision of the Ministry of Religion. 
Correspondence between foreign religious authorities in the Kingdom and foreign authorities abroad is subject to approval of the Ministry of Religion; and no act emanating from foreign authorities abroad can be published in the Kingdom of Serbia, without approval of the Ministry of Religion.
XII. BENEVOLENT INSTITUTIONS
Article 99. Property of charitable foundations and trusts, or private educational establishments, established in accordance with the law, cannot be diverted from the destination, which has been assigned them by their founders. 
Should it ever become impossible to devote the property of these institutions to their primary destination, a special law shall outline the procedure to be followed in this matter, including governmental supervision over all institutions of this kind.    
XIII. THE ARMY
Article 100. Every Serbian citizen is required to serve in the army. Cases of exemption from personal service are fixed by a special law.  
Article 101. Length of military service; the number of soldiers in the permanent forces, and in the reserves; grades and titles, how those are conferred, and under what circumstances they can be lost; as well as the organization of the army in general are determined by a special law. 
Formation of the army is determined by way of royal ordinance. 
Article 102. In penal matters, professional soldiers are tried by courts-martial, in accordance with military law. 
XIV. CONCLUSION
Article 103. The provisions of this Constitution can be deleted, amended, or interpreted following the same procedure laid out in this Constitution for other laws, with one exception: for such propositions to be adopted, two thirds of both houses must vote in their favor. 
However, Provisions of Parts I (The Form of Government, State Religion, and Territory of the Kingdom) and III (Constitutional Rights of Serbian Citizens) cannot be deleted, nor amended, unless at the National Assembly’s initiative, and with three quarters of the total number of deputies voting in favor of it. 
In addition, provisions of Part II (The King) can be changed in the above-described way, only at the King’s initiative. 
Article 104. All current laws are in force, until amended in the lawful way outlined by this Constitution. 
However, laws, which are contrary to the provisions of the present Constitution, shall be considered abrogated the moment this Constitution is promulgated. 
All members of the State Council up to date are relieved from their functions at the time of the promulgation of this Constitution. 
Article 105. In all cases, where this Constitution calls for changes in legislature, those laws must be adopted within the first four-year term of the Parliament. Afterwards, the rest of legislature shall be synchronized with the propositions of this Constitution.  
Article 106. Members of the Senate, appointed by the King, shall create, in accordance with this Constitution, a temporary election law, as well as a temporary code of practice for the first session of each house. The date of the first elections for the National Assembly and the Senate shall be determined by the election law. The length of mandate won in those elections is until May 21, 1905 for members of the National Assembly; and until September 8, 1907 for Senators.
Article 107. This Constitution enters into force when signed by the King; and becomes effective at the time of its promulgation.
Given at Our King’s Palace, on April 6, 1901 in Belgrade. 
ALEKSANDAR s. r.