Title: The Constitutional Charter of the State Community of Serbia and Montenegro, 2003 Date Adopted: 02/04/2003 Country: Serbia and Montenegro Copyright: Oceana Publications, Inc.

[Editor’s Note: On February 4, 2003, the Federal Parliament adopted the Constitutional Charter of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro.] Proceeding from the equality of the two member states, the state of Montenegro and the state of Serbia which comprises the Autonomous Provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo and Metohija which, under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, is currently under an international administration and on the basis of the Proceeding Points for the Restructuring of Relations between Serbia and Montenegro of March 14, 2002, the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, the Assembly of the Republic of Montenegro and the Federal Assembly have adopted THE CONSTITUTIONAL CHARTER OF THE STATE COMMUNITY OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO I The name Article 1 The name of the State Union is Serbia and Montenegro. Principle of equality Article 2 Serbia and Montenegro is based on the equality of the two member states, the state of Serbia and the state of Montenegro. Goals Article 3 The goals of Serbia and Montenegro are: – respect for the human rights of all persons within their concern, – preservation and promotion of human dignity, equality and the rule of law, – integration in European structures, the European Union in particular,

– harmonization of its legislation and practices with European and international standards, – introduction of a market economy based on free enterprise, competition and social justice, and – the establishment and insurance of an unhindered operation of the common market on its territory through coordination and harmonization of the economic systems of the member states in line with the principles and standards of the European Union. Symbols Article 4 Serbia and Montenegro have a flag, an anthem and a coat-of-arms as specified by the laws of Serbia and Montenegro. The territory Article 5 The territory of Serbia and Montenegro consists of the territories of the member states of Serbia and Montenegro. The border of Serbia and Montenegro shall be inviolable. The boundary between the member states shall be unchangeable, except by mutual consent. Seat of institutions Article 6 The administrative center of Serbia and Montenegro shall be in Belgrade. The seat of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro and the Council of Ministers shall be in Belgrade and the seat of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro in Podgorica. Citizenship Article 7 A citizen of a member state shall also be a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro. A citizen of a member state shall have the same rights and duties in the other member state as its own citizens, except for the right to vote. II

The Charter of Human and Minority Rights and Civil Liberties Article 8 A Charter of Human and Minority Rights and Civil Liberties, forming an integral part of the Constitutional Charter, shall be adopted under the procedure and in the manner set forth for the adoption of the Constitutional Charter. Exercise of human and minority rights and civil liberties Article 9 The member states shall regulate, ensure and protect human and minority rights and civil liberties on their territories. The attained level of human and minority rights, individual and collective, and of civil liberties may not be reduced. Serbia and Montenegro shall monitor the implementation of human and minority rights and civil liberties and shall ensure their protection if such protection is not ensured in the member states. Direct implementation of international treaties Article 10 Provisions of international treaties on human and minority rights and civil liberties applicable on the territory of Serbia and Montenegro shall apply directly. III Principles of market economy Article 11 Economic relations in Serbia and Montenegro shall be based on market economy that rest on free enterprise, competition, liberal trade policies and the protection of property. Serbia and Montenegro shall coordinate and harmonize the economic systems of the member states. Common Market Article 12 Serbia and Montenegro have a common market. The member states are responsible for an unhindered operation of the common market. Freedom of movement Article 13

The movement of people, goods, services and capital are free in Serbia and Montenegro. The hindrance of the free flow of people, goods, services and capital between the state of Serbia and the state of Montenegro is prohibited. IV International Personality Article 14 Serbia and Montenegro constitute a single subject of international law and a member of international, global and regional organizations, the membership of which is contingent on international subjectivity. The member states may be members of the international, global and regional, organizations, the membership of which is not contingent on international subjectivity. Establishment and maintenance of international relations Article 15 Serbia and Montenegro shall establish international relations with other states and with international organizations and shall conclude international treaties and agreements. The member states shall maintain international relations, conclude international agreements and establish missions in other states, if this is not contrary to the competences of Serbia and Montenegro and the interests of the other member state. Supremacy of international law Article 16 Ratified international agreements and the generally accepted rules of international law shall have precedence over the law of Serbia and Montenegro and over the law of the member states. V Establishment of the competences of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro Article 17 Serbia and Montenegro have competences entrusted to them by the present Constitutional Charter. The member states may jointly entrust to Serbia and Montenegro with the carrying out of additional affairs as their competences.

Financing of the Competences of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro Article 18 The member states shall provide finances for the carrying out of the entrusted competences and additional affairs of Serbia and Montenegro. VI 1. THE PARLIAMENT OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO Competences Article 19 The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall decide on the Constitutional Charter as a supreme legal act of Serbia and Montenegro in the manner set forth by the Constitutional Charter and pass law and other acts on: – institutions established in accordance with the Constitutional Charter and their operation; – implementation of international law and conventions that have established the obligation of cooperation between Serbia and Montenegro and international courts; – declaring and lifting of a state of war, with prior consent of the Assemblies of the member states; – military and defense matters; – membership of Serbia and Montenegro, as and international legal subject, in international organizations, and the rights and obligations stemming from that membership, with prior consent of relevant bodies of the member states; – identification of borders of Serbia and Montenegro, with prior consent of the Assembly of a member state on whose territory the border extends; – issues related to the standardization, intellectual property, measurements, precious metals and statistics; – policies of immigration and asylum, visa system and integrated border management in accordance with the standards of the European Union; – ratification of international treaties and agreement of Serbia and Montenegro;

– annual revenue and expenditure necessary for funding the activities transferred to Serbia and Montenegro at the proposal of relevant bodies of the member states and the Council of Ministers; – prevention and removal of obstacles to a free flow of goods, services, persons and capital within Serbia and Montenegro; – election of the President and the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro; – the flag, anthem and the coat-of-arms of Serbia and Montenegro. The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall also carry out the affairs from the competences of Serbia and Montenegro as set forth in the Constitutional Charter. The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall adopt its rules of procedure. Composition and election Article 20 The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall be unicameral consisting of 126 members, of whom 91 shall come from Serbia and 35 from Montenegro. Members of Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro are elected from each member state in accordance with European and democratic standards under the laws of the member states. In the first two years after the promulgation of the Constitutional Charter, Members of Parliament shall be directly elected, in proportion to the representation in the National Assembly of Serbia and the Assembly of Montenegro. In the first elections, Members of Parliament shall be elected from among the Deputies in the National Assembly of Serbia, in the National Assembly of Montenegro and the Federal Assembly. If a member state holds parliamentary elections in that same period, the composition of its delegation to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall be proportionally adjusted to the election results. After this initial period, Members of Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall be elected in direct elections. The mandate of a Member of Parliament lasts four years. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro Article 21 The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Parliament are elected from among its members who cannot come from the same member state.

Incompatibility of offices Article 22 The Speaker of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro and the President of Serbia and Montenegro cannot come from the same member state. Decision-making Article 23 The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall take decisions by a majority vote of all Members of Parliament, provided that a decision has been supported by a majority of the Members of Parliament from each member state. Freedom of speech and immunity Article 24 Members of Parliament shall enjoy freedom of speech in the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro and immunity for words spoken and acts done in the performance of their duties as Member of Parliament. A Member of Parliament may not be made accountable, arrested or punished without the approval of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, unless he/she has been caught in the act of committing a crime punishable by an imprisonment of five or more years. The President of Serbia and Montenegro, members of the Council of Ministers and the judges of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro enjoy the same immunities as members of Parliament. The right to present a bill Article 25 A bill may be presented to the Parliament by the Council of Ministers, a Member of Parliament and the Assembly of the member state. 2. PRESIDENT OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO Competence Article 26
The President of Serbia and Montenegro:

– represents Serbia and Montenegro at home and abroad; – chairs the Council of Ministers and directs its activities;

– proposes to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro the composition of the Council of Ministers and the removes its members; – sits on the Supreme Defense Council; – issues decrees by which the heads of Diplomatic and Consular Missions of Serbia and Montenegro are appointed or recalled and receive Letters of Credence and Letters of Recall from Foreign Diplomatic Representatives; – confers medals and other decorations; – promulgates the laws passed by the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro and the decrees adopted by the Council of Ministers; – calls elections for the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro; – performs other duties provided for by this Constitutional Charter. Election Article 27 The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro propose to the Parliament a candidate for President of Serbia and Montenegro. If the proposed candidate fails to win a majority of the required votes, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall propose a new candidate within ten days. If this candidate also fails to receive the necessary majority of votes, the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro is dissolved and elections shall be called. If the elected President of Serbia and Montenegro comes from the same member state as the Speaker, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall change their functions. The President of Serbia and Montenegro cannot come twice in succession from the same member state. The procedure for the election and removal of the President of Serbia and Montenegro is regulated by law. Accountability Article 28 The President of Serbia and Montenegro is accountable for his work to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro.

Mandate Article 29 The President of Serbia and Montenegro is elected for a term of office of four years. End of Mandate Article 30 The term of office of the President of Serbia and Montenegro may end early by his resignation, removal or by the dissolution of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro. The term of office of the President of Serbia and Montenegro shall end by resignation when the resignation is verified by the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro. Removal from office Article 31 The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro may remove the President of Serbia and Montenegro if he has been found to have been in breach of the Constitutional Charter. The breach of the Constitutional Charter shall be established by the Court of Serbia and Montenegro. The procedure for the establishment of the breach of the Constitutional Charter shall be instituted by the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro. Performance of functions after the end of term of office Article 32 The President of Serbia and Montenegro whose term of office has ended due to the dissolution of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall continue in office pending the election of a new President. If the President of Serbia and Montenegro resigns and has been removed, his duties shall be temporarily taken up by the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro pending the election of a new President. 3. THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS Competence Article 33 The Council of Ministers: – determines and implements the policy of Serbia and Montenegro in line with a common policy and interests of the member states; – coordinates the work of Ministries;

– proposes to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro laws and other acts falling within the competences of Ministries; – appoints and dismisses the heads of the diplomatic and consular missions of Serbia and Montenegro and of other officials in accordance with the law; – adopts by-laws, decisions and other general acts required for the implementation of laws of Serbia and Montenegro; – discharges other executive functions under the Constitutional Charter. Representation of Serbia and Montenegro Article 34 In the missions of Serbia and Montenegro to international organizations, the United Nations, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and the Council of Europe, the member states are presented on a parity basis and through rotation. A model for the representation of the member states in international financial institutions shall be defined by the Council of Ministers, with the consent of relevant institutions in the member states. The representation of the member states in the diplomatic and consular missions of Serbia and Montenegro are decided by the Council of Ministers, with the consent of relevant institutions of the member states. Election Article 35 The President of Serbia and Montenegro proposes to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro candidates for Ministers sitting on the Council of Ministers and candidates for the posts of Deputy Foreign Ministers and Deputy Defense Minister. Two candidates for Ministers shall come from the same member state as the President of Serbia and Montenegro, while three of them shall come from the other member states. Candidates for Foreign and Defense Ministers shall be selected from different member states, as well as their Deputies. The Parliament votes for a list of candidates for the Council of Ministers. If the list does not receive the required majority of votes, the President may propose lists of candidates on two more occasions.

If even then the list of candidates does not receive the required majority of votes, the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro shall be dissolved and elections called within 60 days from the date on which initial candidates’ list were proposed. The procedure for the election and the end of the term of office of the Council of Ministers is regulated by law. Decision-making Article 36 The Council of Ministers takes decisions by a majority of votes. In the event of an equal number of votes, the vote of the President is decisive, provided that at least one Minister from the other member state votes in favor of the decision. Accountability Article 37 The Council of Ministers is accountable for its work to the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro. Mandate Article 38 Ministers are elected for a term of four years. End of term of office Article 39 The terms of office of Ministers and their Deputies may end early by resignation, a vote of no confidence, removal or by the dissolution of the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro. The Ministers and Deputy Ministers whose terms of office have ended shall continue in office pending the election of new Ministers and their deputies. Ministers Article 40 The Minister of Foreign Affairs shall carry out and be responsible for the conduct of the foreign policy of Serbia and Montenegro, negotiate international treaties and propose to the Council of Ministers candidates for heads of diplomatic and consular missions of Serbia and Montenegro. The Minister of Foreign Affairs shall coordinate the formulation of foreign policy with relevant organs of the member states. Article 41

The Minister of Defense coordinates and implements the defined defense policy and directs the armed forces in accordance with the law and the powers vested in the Supreme Defense Council. The Minister of Defense proposes to the Supreme Defense Council candidates for appointment and shall appoint, promote and relieve of duties officers in accordance with the law. The Minister of Defense shall be a civilian. Article 42 After a period of two years, the Minster of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defense shall change their functions with their respective deputies. Article 43 The Minister for International Economic Cooperation is responsible for negotiating and coordinating the implementation of international treaties, including treaty relations with the European Union and relations with international economic and financial institutions, following consultations with competent Ministers of the member states. Article 44 The Minister for Internal Economic Cooperation is responsible for the coordination and harmonization of the economic systems of the member states for the purpose of the establishment and the unhindered operation of the common market, including a free movement of goods, services, people and capital. Article 45 The Minister for Human and Minority Rights shall monitor the exercise of human and minority rights and coordinate with the relevant organs of the member states, the efforts to ensure the implementation and respect for international conventions on the protection of human and minority rights. 4. THE COURT OF SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO Jurisdiction Article 46 The Court of Serbia and Montenegro: – settles disputes as may arise between institutions of Serbia and Montenegro over matters related to their competences under the Constitutional Charter;

– settles disputes as may arise between Serbia and Montenegro and one or both member states or between the two member states over matters related to their competences; – rules on petitions of citizens if no other recourse has been provided for in the event the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro have violated their rights or freedoms guaranteed by the Constitutional Charter; – rules on whether the constitutions of the member states are in conformity with the Constitutional Charter; – rules on whether the laws of Serbia and Montenegro are in conformity with the Constitutional Charter; – rules on whether the laws of the member states are in conformity with the legislation of Serbia and Montenegro; – rules on the legality of final administrative acts of the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro. The Court shall give legal advice and opinions regarding the harmonization of court practices. Composition and election Article 47 The Court of Serbia and Montenegro shall have an equal number of judges from both member states. The judges of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro shall be elected by the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro at the proposal of the Council of Ministers for a period of six years. The judges are lawyers with degrees in law and at least 15 years of experience in the profession. The judges shall be elected only once. Judges are independent in their work and may not be relieved of duties before the expiration of the term of office of which they have been elected to, except in cases specified by law. The Rulings of the Court Article 48 Rulings by the Court of Serbia and Montenegro are binding and may not be appealed.

The Court is authorized to invalidate laws, other regulations and enactments of the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro that are contrary to the Constitutional Charter and the laws of Serbia and Montenegro. The Proceedings of the Court Article 49 When an assessment is made of the harmonization of the laws or jurisdictions of the member states with the laws and jurisdiction of Serbia and Montenegro or between the laws and jurisdictions of the member states, the judges of the Constitutional Courts of the member states shall participate and take decisions at the proceedings of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro. When an assessment is made of the harmonization of the Constitution, laws and jurisdiction of a member state with the Constitutional Charter, laws or jurisdiction of Serbia and Montenegro, judges of the Constitutional Court of that member state shall participate and take decisions at the proceedings of the sittings of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro. The Organization, functioning and method of ruling Article 50 The organization, functioning and method of ruling of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro are regulated by law. VII The Harmonization of legal acts Article 51 The Constitutional Charter, laws and jurisdiction of Serbia and Montenegro and the Constitutions, laws and jurisdiction of the member states must be harmonized. Coming into force Article 52 The laws and other enactments of the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro shall come into force no sooner than eight days after their publication. Exceptionally, if there are reasons ascertained in the procedure of its adoption, it may be provided that the laws and other enactments of Serbia and Montenegro may come into force on the date of their publication. Retroactive effects Article 53

The laws and other enactments of the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro cannot have retroactive effect. Exceptionally, certain provisions may have retroactive effects if there exists public interests therefore ascertained in the procedure of their adoption. VIII The Armed Forces of Serbia and Montenegro Article 54 Serbia and Montenegro have the Armed Forces under democratic and civilian control. The task of the Armed Forces of Serbia and Montenegro Article 55 The task of the Armed Forces is to defend Serbia and Montenegro in accordance with the Constitutional Charter and the principles of international law governing the use of force. A defense strategy is adopted by the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro in accordance with the law. The Supreme Defense Council Article 56 The Supreme Defense Council is the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces of Serbia and Montenegro, which decides on the use of the armed forces. The Supreme Defense Council comprises the President of Serbia and Montenegro and the Presidents of the member states. The Supreme Defense Council shall decide by consensus. National Service Article 57 Recruits perform their National Service in the territory of the member state whose nationals they are, with the possibility of serving in the territory of the other member state according to their free choice. Conscientious objections Article 58 Recruits are guaranteed the right of conscientious objection. IX

The property of Serbia and Montenegro Article 59 The property of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia necessary for the operation of the institutions of Serbia and Montenegro is the property of Serbia and Montenegro. The property of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia abroad is the property of Serbia and Montenegro. The property of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia in the territory of the member states is the property of the member states based on the territorial principle. Withdrawal from the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro Article 60 Upon the expiry of a three-year period the member state has the right to initiate the procedure for a change of the state status, i.e. withdrawal from the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. A decision to withdraw from the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro is made after a referendum has been held. The Law on the Referendum shall be adopted by a member state, taking into account recognized democratic standards. In case Montenegro withdraws from the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, the international documents related to the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia, particularly the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, shall pertain and apply fully to Serbia as its successor. The member state that exercises the right of withdrawal shall not inherit the right to international legal personality and all outstanding issues shall be regulated separately between the successor state and the state that has become independent. If both member states declare in a referendum that they are in favor of changing the state status, i.e. in favor of independence, all outstanding issues shall be resolved in the succession procedure, as was the case with the former Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia. X Adoption of the Constitutional Charter Article 61

The Constitutional Charter is adopted in the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia and the Assembly of the Republic of Montenegro as an identical text and comes into force once adopted and proclaimed in the same text in the Federal Assembly. Amendments to the Constitutional Charter Article 62 Amendments of the Constitutional Charter are made according to the procedure and in the manner in which the Constitutional Charter is adopted. XI Transfer of rights and obligations Article 63 Once the Constitutional Charter comes into force, all the rights and obligations of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia are transferred to Serbia and Montenegro in accordance with the Constitutional Charter. Implementation of the laws of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia Article 64 The laws of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia regarding the affairs of Serbia and Montenegro are applied as the laws of Serbia and Montenegro. The laws of the Federative Republic of Yugoslavia, except for the laws that the Assembly of a member state decides not to be applicable, shall be applied as the laws of the member states pending the adoption of new regulations by the member states. Harmonization with the Constitutional Charter Article 65 The member states shall amend their Constitutions or adopt new constitutions in order to harmonize them with the Constitutional Charter within six months of the adoption of the Constitutional Charter. Transfer of competences Article 66 The competences of military courts, prosecutors and public attorneys are transferred to the organs of the member states in accordance with the law. XII The Law on the Implementation of the Constitutional Charter Article 67

The Law on the Implementation of the Constitutional Charter is adopted in the same manner and at the same time as the Constitutional Charter.

Charter on Human and Minority Rights and Civil Liberties
In the awareness of the fact that human rights are the cornerstone of any democratic community, Being committed to democracy, peace, tolerance, respect for human rights, rule of law and social justice, the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, the Assembly of the Republic of Montenegro and the Federal Assembly, hereby adopt the following:

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
I GENERAL PROVISIONS Human Dignity and                                                 Article 1 Human dignity shall be inviolable. Everyone shall have the duty to protect it. Unrestricted Development of Personality Everyone shall have the right to unrestricted development of his/her personality, on condition that he/she does not infringe on the rights of others guaranteed under this Charter. Respect for Human                                                 Article 2 Everyone shall have the duty to respect the human and minority rights and Minority Rights of others. The human and minority rights guaranteed under this Charter shall be directly applied in accordance with the Constitutional Charter of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. The human and minority rights guaranteed under this Charter shall be directly regulated, secured and protected by the constitutions, laws and policies of the Member States. Prohibition against                                                 Article 3 Everyone shall be equal before the law. Discrimination Everyone shall have the right to equal legal protection, without any discrimination. Any direct or indirect discrimination on any grounds, including those relating to race, colour, sex, ethnic affiliation, social background, birth or similar status, religion, political or other convictions, financial standing, culture, language, age or mental or physical disability, shall be prohibited. Special measures necessary for the achievement of equality, appropriate protection and progress of persons or groups of persons, with a view to

1

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

making it possible for them to fully enjoy human and minority rights on equal terms, may be taken on a temporary basis. The special measures referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article may be applied only until the achievement of aims for which they are undertaken. Prohibition against                                                  Article 4 The provisions of this Charter may not be interpreted so as to imply the Abolition or Restriction of Human and Minority Rights right of the State Union, its Member States, some group or individual to Provided by this Charter take action aimed at abolishing the rights guaranteed under this Charter or limiting them to an extent that is greater than that set by the Constitutional Charter of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, this Charter and constitutions of the Member States. Restrictions on Human                                                Article 5 The guaranteed human and minority rights may be restricted only on and Minority Rights the basis of the Constitutional Charter of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, this Charter and constitutions of the Member States, and the law that is generally applied and makes reference to a provision permitting the restriction. The guaranteed human and minority rights may be restricted only to the extent necessary to fulfil in an open and free democratic society the purpose for which the restriction is permitted. Restrictions may not be imposed for purposes other than those for which they have been placed. In placing restrictions on human and minority rights and interpreting these restrictions, all state agencies, courts in particular, shall take into account the essence of the right subjected to restriction, importance of the purpose of restriction, nature and scope of restriction, relationship between the restriction and its purpose and whether there is a way of achieving the same purpose with a smaller restriction of rights. Restrictions shall in no way go into the essence of the guaranteed right. Deviation from Human                                                Article 6 Upon official declaration of a state of war or state of emergency, where a and Minority Rights threat to survival of the State Union or a Member State is posed, measures deviating from the human and minority rights guaranteed under this Charter may be taken, though only to the extent necessitated by the given situation. The measures of deviation may not result in any discrimination based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, ethnic affiliation or social background. The measures of deviation from the human and minority rights in areas in the jurisdiction of the State Union institutions may be introduced prescribed only on the basis of general acts adopted by the Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro or the Council of Ministers, if the Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro is unable to convene. The decision on deviation from the human and minority rights in the case of declaration of a state of war shall be subject to the approval of the competent agencies of the Member States. The measures of deviation from the human and minority rights in the fields of their competence shall be regulated by the Member States’ constitutions and laws, in conformity with this Charter. The measures of deviation from human and minority rights set by the Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro or the Council of Ministers shall be valid for 90 days, and upon the expiration of that period, their validity may be extended for additional 90-day periods.

2

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

The Council of Ministers shall submit its acts setting measures of deviation from human and minority rights to the Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro for approval as soon as it is able to convene. Otherwise, measures of deviation from human and minority rights shall cease to be valid at the end of the first session of the Assembly of Serbia and Montenegro held after declaration of the state of war. The measures of deviation from human and minority rights shall cease to be valid upon the termination of the state of war or state of emergency. During a state of war, the Court of Serbia and Montenegro shall carry on working. The status and powers of the Court of Serbia and Montenegro and its judges shall remain unchanged. The measures of deviation from human and minority rights shall in no case be permitted with regard to the rights guaranteed under Articles 1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 35, 50 and 51 of this Charter. Human and Minority Rights                                             Article 7 The human and minority rights guaranteed under generally accepted rules Guaranteed under of international law, as well as by international treaties in force in the State International Documents Union, shall be guaranteed under this Charter and be directly applicable. Prohibition against                                                  Article 8 It shall not be permissible to place restrictions on the human and minority Restriction of Human and rights guaranteed under generally accepted rules of international law, interMinority Rights under the national treaties valid in the State Union and valid laws and regulations, on the Pretext of their not being pretext of their not being guaranteed under this Charter or being guaranGuaranteed under this teed to a smaller extent. Charter Judicial Protection                                                  Article 9 Everyone shall have the right to beneficial judicial protection in the case of and Elimination of the Conviolation or denial of any human or minority right guaranteed under this charsequences of Violation of ter, as well as the right to elimination of the consequences of such violation. Human and Minority Rights Anyone who is of the opinion that any of his/her rights guaranteed under this Charter has been violated or denied by an individual deed or action of a State Union institution, or a Member State agency or organisation exercising public powers, shall have the right to lodge a complaint with the Court of Serbia and Montenegro, unless other legal protection is provided in the Member State concerned, in accordance with the Constitutional Charter. Decisions of international bodies shall be executed and cost thereof shall be borne by the State Union or the Member State concerned, depending on whether a State Union institution, Member State or an organisation exercising public powers has violated or denied any right guaranteed under an international treaty valid in the territory of Serbia and Montenegro. Interpretation of the                                                 Article 10 The human and minority rights guaranteed under this Charter shall be Provisions dealing with interpreted in a manner that promotes the values of an open and free demoHuman and Minority Rights cratic society and in accordance with the valid international guarantees for human and minority rights and practices of international bodies supervising their implementation. II HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS Right to Life                                                     Article 11 Human life shall be inviolable. Capital punishment shall not exist in the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. The cloning of human beings shall be prohibited.

3

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

Inviolability of Physical                                               Article 12 Everyone shall be entitled to inviolability of his/her physical and mental and Mental Integrity integrity. No one may be subjected to torture, inhuman or humiliating treatment. No one may be subjected to medical or scientific experiments without his/her freely given consent. Prohibition against Slavery,                                             Article 13 No one may be kept as a slave or in a status akin to that of a slave. TrafStatus akin to Slavery and Forced Labour ficking in human beings in any form shall be prohibited. Forced labour shall be prohibited. Sexual or economic abuse of any person in a disadvantageous position shall also be regarded as forced labour. Forced labour shall not be understood to mean any work or service lawfully required of effectively convicted persons, persons doing their military service or in the case of emergency situations posing a threat to survival of the Union. Right to Freedom                                                  Article 14 Everyone shall have the right to personal freedom and security. and Security No one may be arrested by somebody’s own volition. Arrest shall be permissible only in the cases and the way determined by the State Union Law or laws of the Member States. No one may be arrested only because of his/her inability to perform a contractual duty. Any arrested person shall be notified forthwith, in the language he/she understands, of the reasons for his/her arrest or indictment, as well as of his/ her rights. Any arrested person shall have the right to inform promptly a person of his own choosing accordingly. Any arrested person shall have the right to instigate proceedings by which the court shall examine by emergency procedure the lawfulness of the arrest and order his/her discharge if the arrest has been found to be unlawful. Any arrested person shall be treated humanely and with due respect for his personality. Any violence against an arrested person and extortion of evidence shall be prohibited in particular. Anyone who has been arrested unlawfully shall have a right to an indemnity. Additional Guarantees                                                Article 15 Any arrested person shall be informed promptly that he/she has the in the case of Arrest for a Felony or Breach of right not to make any statement and the right to have a defence counsel of Regulations his/her own choice present at his/her examination. Any arrested person shall be brought to the competent court promptly, no longer than within 48 hours. Otherwise, he/she shall be discharged. Any person reasonably suspected of having committed a criminal act may be detained only by decision of the competent court, if so is necessary for the purposes of conducting the criminal proceedings. The duration of detention shall not last longer than necessary under law, which shall be seen to by the competent court. Special Guarantees                                                 Article 16 Everyone shall have the right to be informed as soon as possible, thoroughly and in the language he/she understands, of the nature of and reasons for charges being brought against him/her, and the right to a trial without prolongation.

4

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

Everyone shall have the right to defence, including the right to take a defence counsel of his own choosing before the court or other authority competent for conducting proceedings, to undisturbed communication with his/her defence counsel and to have enough time and conditions for the preparation of his/her defence. The cases in which the interests of fairness call for the accused to be given a court-assigned counsel, if he/she is unable to pay the defence counsel’s fees, shall be determined in greater detail by law. The accused shall have the right to be assisted by an interpreter if he/she does not understand or speak the language used in the proceedings. No one who is accessible to the court or some other authority competent for the conduct of proceedings may be punished if it has not been made possible for him/her to be examined and to defend him/herself. No one may be forced into testifying against him/herself or admitting his/ her guilt. Right to Fair Trial                                                  Article 17 Everyone shall be guaranteed equal protection of rights in the proceedings before courts, other state authorities and holders of public powers. Anyone shall have the right for his/her rights and duties, as well as the accusations made against him/her, to be decided on without any delay by independent, unbiased and lawfully established court. Court decisions shall be pronounced in public, and court proceedings shall be public, with the exception of cases determined by law. Right to Legal Remedy                                                Article 18 Everyone shall have the right to appeal or some other legal remedy against any decision on his/her rights, duties or legally founded interests. Presumption of Innocence                                              Article 19 Everyone shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty of a criminal act by a court decision ready to be carried out. Prohibition against                                                  Article 20 No one may be deemed guilty of or be punished for an act that prior to Retroactivity, Punishment Administered only on the being committed was not determined as punishable by law. Basis of Law Punishments shall be meted out in accordance with the law in force at the time when the act was committed, unless a subsequent law is more favourable for the perpetrator. Ne Bis in Idem                                                    Article 21 No one may be tried twice for one and the same punishable criminal act. Right to Rehabilitation and                                              Article 22 Any person who has been sentenced unreasonably for a punishable act shall Compensation for Error in Judgement in Criminal have the right to be rehabilitated and paid compensation by the State. Proceedings Right of Property                                                  Article 23 The right of property and the right of inheritance shall be guaranteed. The use of property may be regulated by law in accordance with the common interest. No one shall be deprived of his/her property, except when so is in public interest determined by law, and against a compensation that may not be lower than the market value, or in order to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or fines. A competent court shall settle any dispute over the amount of compensation.

5

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

Right to Respect for                                                 Article 24 Everyone has the right to respect being shown for his/her private and Private and Family Life family life, his/her home and confidentiality of his/her correspondence. No one may enter somebody else’s dwelling or other premises against the will of their holder, or search them, except on the basis of a court warrant. Somebody’s dwelling or other premises may be entered and searched without a court warrant only if so is necessary for the purposes of directly arresting the perpetrator of a criminal act or for the purposes of eliminating a direct and serious threat to people or property, in the way determined by law. The confidentiality of letters and other means of communication shall be inviolable. Deviations from this shall be permissible only for a definite period of time set by a court decision, if so is necessary for the purposes of conducting criminal proceedings or for national defence purposes, in the way determined by law. The protection of personal data shall be guaranteed. Their collection, keeping and use shall be regulated by law. The use of personal data for purposes other than those for which they were collected shall be prohibited and punishable. Everyone shall have the right to be informed about the collected data on his person in accordance with the law. Right to Marriage                                                  Article 25 The right of spouses-to-be to enter into marriage on their freely given consent thereto shall be guaranteed. The entering into marriage, its duration and divorce shall be based on the equality of spouses. Children born out of wedlock shall enjoy the same rights as children born in wedlock. Freedom of Thought,                                                 Article 26 Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience, convicConscience and Religion tion and religion; including to freedom to remain committed to one’s belief or religion or to change them at one’s own choosing. No one shall be obliged to declare his religious and other convictions. Everyone shall be free in private and public life to express his/her religion or conviction by practising a religion, performing rites, attending services and teaching, individually or together with others. The freedom to express one’s religion or conviction may be limited by law if so is necessary for the purpose of protecting public security, health, morality and rights of other persons. Parents, as well as legal guardians, shall have the right to provide for their children the religious and moral education in accordance with their own convictions. Religious Communities                                                Article 27 Religious communities shall have equal rights and be separate from the state. Religious communities shall be free to independently regulate their internal organisation, religious activities and religious rites. Religious communities shall have the right to establish religious schools and charity organisations, in accordance with the law. Conscientious Objection                                               Article 28 Conscientious objection shall be recognised in the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. No one shall be obliged to perform military or other duties entailing the use of weapons contrary to his/her religion or conviction. Such a person

6

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

may be called to perform appropriate civil duties, in accordance with the law. Freedom of Opinion                                                 Article 29 Everyone shall have the right to freedom of opinion and expression. This and Expression right shall include freedom to seek, receive and disseminate information and ideas by speech, writing, and picture or in any other way. Everyone shall have the right of access to data in possession of state authorities, in accordance with the law. The right to freedom of expression may be restricted by law, if so is necessary towards protecting the rights and reputation of other people, preserving the authority and impartiality of courts, national security, public health or morality or public security. Freedom of the Mass Media                                             Article 30 Any person may establish a newspaper or some other public media without a permit to do so. Television and radio stations may be established in conformity with the laws of the Member States. There shall be no censorship in the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Any person shall have the right to a correction of any published untrue, incomplete or incorrectly transmitted information that infringes on his/her rights or interests, in conformity with the law. Any person shall have the right to receive a reply to information published in the media, in conformity with the law. No one may prevent newssheets from being distributed or information and ideas from being disseminated through other mass media, unless it is established by court decision that so is necessary for the purpose of curbing the advocacy of war, incitement to direct violence or racial, national or ethnic hatred that stand for incitement to discrimination, hostility and violence. Freedom of Assembly                                                Article 31 The freedom of peaceful assembly shall be guaranteed. No prior permit or application shall be required for indoor assemblies. The laws of the Member States may make it necessary for the organisers of outdoor assemblies and demonstrations to announce them to competent authorities. The freedom of assembly may be restricted by the laws of Member States if so is necessary for reasons of public security, public health and morality, national security or protection of the rights other persons. Freedom of Association                                               Article 32 Everyone has the right of free association, including also the right not to be a member of some organisation. Political, trade union and other organisations may be formed without a prior permit, by being entered in the register kept by the competent authority. The right of free association may be restricted by the laws of Member States, if so is necessary for reasons of public security, public health or morality, national security or protection of rights of others. Organisations the activities of which are aimed at forcible destruction of the constitutional system, revocation of guaranteed human rights or pro-

7

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

voking racial, ethnic or religious hatred, may be banned by decision of a competent court. Right to Free Elections                                                Article 33 Citizens of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro shall have the right to participate in decision-making on public affairs, either directly or through representatives elected freely by secret ballot, at general and periodical elections. Any citizen of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro over 18 years of age shall have the right to vote and to be elected to local self-government bodies, Member State bodies and State Union institutions, in accordance with the Constitutional Charter and laws of the Member States. The right to vote shall be universal and equal, by secret ballot. Right of Petition                                                   Article 34 Everyone shall have the right to address the government agencies individually or together with others, file petitions and other proposals with them and receive answers from them, if so requested. No one shall suffer any harmful consequences of exercising of this right. Citizenship                                                      Article 35 Any child born in the territory of Serbia and Montenegro shall have the right of citizenship, unless he holds another citizenship. No citizen of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro may be deprived of citizenship, expelled from the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, or extradited outside its territory, if so is not in keeping with the international duties assumed by the Member States. Legal Age                                                      Article 36 Any person shall be deemed as being of legal age on reaching the age of 18 years. Right to Freedom                                                  Article 37 Everyone shall have the right to free movement and residence anywhere of Movement in the territory of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, as well as the right to depart therefrom and return thereto. The freedom of movement and residence and the right to leave the territory of the State Union may be restricted by law, if so is necessary for the conduct of criminal proceedings, protection of public order and peace, preventing communicable diseases from spreading or for reasons of national defence. Entry of aliens into the territory of Serbia and Montenegro and their stay therein shall be regulated by law. Any alien may be expelled from the territory of Serbia and Montenegro only on the basis of decision of competent authorities and by the procedure provided by law. No expelled person may be sent to a place where he/she might be persecuted because of his/her race, religion, affiliation to a certain social group or political opinion, or where his/her rights guaranteed under this Charter might be violated seriously. Right of Asylum in the                                                Article 38 Any alien who reasonably fears that he/she might be persecuted because State Union of Serbia and Montenegro of his/her race, colour, sex, language, religion, ethnic affiliation, membership of a group or political conviction, shall have the right of asylum in Serbia and Montenegro. The asylum granting procedure shall be determined by law.

8

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

Any person who has been forcibly displaced in the territory of Serbia and Montenegro shall have the right to an effective protection and assistance in accordance with laws and international obligations of Serbia and Montenegro. Special Protection                                                  Article 39 Family, mother and child shall enjoy special protection afforded by sociof Family, Mother and Child ety and the Member States. The mother’s right to the Member State’s support and protection within a period prior to and after giving birth specified by law, shall be guaranteed. Right to Work                                                    Article 40 The right to work in conformity with law shall be guaranteed. The Member States shall create the conditions under which everyone can earn his/her living. Everyone shall have the right to a free choice of work. Everyone has the right to fair and appropriate working conditions, and in particular to a fair compensation for his/her work. Right to Go on Strike                                                 Article 41 Employed persons shall have the right to go on strike in accordance with law. Social Welfare                                                    Article 42 Any person residing in the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro shall and Social Security have the right to social welfare and social security, in accordance with law. Right to Education                                                  Article 43 Everyone shall have the right to education. Elementary education shall be obligatory. The Member States shall provide for free elementary education. Laws of the Member States shall regulate the establishment of schools and universities. Freedom of Creative                                                 Article 44 Everyone shall have the right to unrestricted creative scientific and artisScientific and Artistic Work tic work. The makers of works of science and art shall be guaranteed moral and material rights, in accordance with law. Right to Health Care                                                 Article 45 Everyone shall have the right to health care. The Member States shall provide health care for children, mothers-tobe and elderly people, unless they are enjoying it on some other grounds. Healthy Environment                                                 Article 46 Everyone and the State Union and Member States in particular, shall be responsible for environmental protection. Everyone shall have the right to a healthy environment and to receive timely and full information about its status. Everyone shall be bound to protect and improve the environment. III RIGHTS OF THE MEMBERS OF NATIONAL MINORITIES Grounds for and Frame                                                Article 47 The rights of members of national minorities shall be exercised in acof the Rights of Members of cordance with provisions of international law dealing with the protection of National Minorities human and minority rights. Members of national minorities shall have individual and collective rights, rights that are exercised individually or together with others, in conformity with law and up to international standards.

9

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

Collective rights shall imply that members of national minorities may take part, directly or through their elected representatives, in the decisionmaking process or decide on issues related to their culture, education, information and the use of language and script, in accordance with law. For the purpose of exercising their right to self-management in the fields of culture, education, information and official use of language and script, members of national minorities may elect their national councils, in accordance with law. In addition to the term “national minorities”, other terms established by the constitutions and laws of the Member States may also be equally used. Freedom to Express                                                 Article 48 National Identity The freedom to express ethnic affiliation shall be guaranteed. No one shall be bound to declare his/her ethnic affiliation. Prohibition against                                                  Article 49 Discrimination Members of national minorities shall be guaranteed equality before the law and equal legal protection. Any discrimination based on affiliation to a national minority shall be prohibited. Such regulations, measures and actions as are aimed at securing the rights of members of national minorities, when they are in a position of inequality, allowing them to enjoy rights fully on equal terms, shall not be deemed discriminatory. Prohibition against                                                  Article 50 Forcible Assimilation Forcible assimilation of members of national minorities shall be prohibited. The Member States and the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro shall protect members of national minorities from any action aimed at such assimilation. Prohibition against                                                  Article 51 Provoking Racial, Ethnic Any provocation of and incitement to ethnic, racial, religious and other and Religious Hatred inequality, as well as provocation and stirring up of national, ethnic, racial, religious and other hatred and intolerance, shall be prohibited and punishable. Right to Preservation                                                Article 52 of Identity Members of national minorities shall have the following rights: – to express, keep, cherish, develop and publicly manifest their national and ethnic, cultural and religious identity; – to use their symbols at public places; – to freely use their language and script; – to proceedings being conducted by the authorities in the communities having a considerable minority population also in the language of the minority population concerned; – to receive education in their language in state institutions; – to establish private educational institutions at all levels; – to use their own name and surname in their own language; – to the traditional local names, names of streets and settlements, as well as topographic signs to be written also in the minority language;

10

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

– to a certain number of seats in the Assembly of the Member State concerned and in the Assembly of the State Union, based on the principle of direct representation, in accordance with the laws of the Member States; – to be adequately represented in public services, state authorities and local self-governance authorities; – to be fully and impartially informed in their own language, including the right to express, receive, send and exchange information and ideas; – to establish their own public media . The way of exercising these rights shall be provided by law. Right to Association                                                 Article 53 Members of national minorities shall have the right to establish educational and cultural organisations and associations, the financing of which is carried out voluntarily. Organisations and associations of members of national minorities shall be recognised a special role in the exercise of rights of members of national minorities. Co-operation                                                     Article 54 Members of national minorities shall have the right to establish undiswith Compatriots turbed relations and to co-operate with their compatriots living outside the in Other States territory of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Improvement                                                    Article 55 The Member States shall adopt, wherever necessary, appropriate meaof Living Conditions sures towards advancing full and effective equality between members of national minorities and members of the majority, in all spheres of economic, social, political and cultural life. When necessary, the measures referred to in the previous paragraph shall be geared to the elimination of strikingly unfavourable living conditions, particularly affecting members of a national minority. The State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, acting within the competencies determined by the Constitutional Charter, and the Member States, shall guarantee to members of national minorities the right to manage public affairs, including the right to vote and be nominated for holders of public offices, on equal footing with other citizens. Development of a Spirit                                               Article 56 The State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and the Member States shall of Tolerance encourage a spirit of tolerance and multicultural dialogue in the fields of education, culture and the media, and apply efficacious measures towards upgrading mutual respect and understanding and co-operation among all people living in its territory, irrespective of their ethnic, cultural, linguistic or religious identity. Guarantee                                                      Article 57 The achieved level of human and minority rights, individual and collecfor Vested Rights tive, may not be reduced. This Charter shall not revoke or alter the rights vested in members of national minorities by the regulations that were in force prior to the effective date of this Charter, as well as the rights acquired on the basis of international treaties to which the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had acceded.

11

CHARTER ON HUMAN AND MINORITY RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

