Adopted by the Grand National Assembly in Kragujevac, and proclaimed by Prince Milan Obrenovic IV on Pentecost, 1869
I. State Territory, the Prince, Succession to the Throne, and Authorities of the Prince
Article I. The government of the Principality of Serbia is a constitutional, parliamentary, and hereditary monarchy.
Article 2. The state territory of the Principality of Serbia cannot be alienated, nor divided. It can be neither diminished, nor can parts of it be exchanged, without the approval of the Grand National Assembly; however, the approval of the Regular National Assembly is sufficient for areas of lesser importance.
Article 3. The Prince is the head of the state, and thus holds all state powers, which he exercises according to provisions of this Constitution. 
His person is inviolable, and he cannot be held responsible.
Article 4. The Prince exercises the legislative power, along with the National Assembly.
Article 5. The Prince approves and promulgates laws. 
A law cannot enter into force, until promulgated by the Prince.
Article 6. The Prince appoints all public servants; all government bodies perform their functions on his behalf, and under his supervision.
Article 7. The Prince is the commander-in-chief of all military forces of the country.
Article 8. The Prince represents the country in foreign affairs, and concludes treaties with foreign countries. 
However, the approval of the National Assembly is mandatory for treaties, the execution of which would involve expenditure at the expense of the public treasury; a modification of existing laws; or limiting of public or private rights. 
Article 9. The Prince resides in the country permanently; should it be necessary for the Prince to leave the country temporarily, he shall appoint one or more regents to represent him during his absence, in accordance with instructions given by the Prince, within the boundaries of the Constitution. 
The Prince shall announce his leave, and the appointment of regents to the people, by a proclamation.
Article 10. The current ruler, Prince Milan M. Obrenovic IV, shall be succeeded by his male descendant, from a legal marriage, in the order of primogeniture, according to acts passed by common law assemblies prior to 1839, and confirmed by the St. Andrew's Day Assembly in 1858; by the Grand National Assembly on June 20, 1868; and by the Sultan’s 1830 and 1868 decrees. Should the Prince leave after him no male descendant, the throne shall be succeeded along the collateral line, in the order of primogeniture. 
However, should Prince Milan leave after him no male descendant, the people shall elect the heir to the throne among the male descendants of the Prince’s daughters, according to merit.
The elected descendant of Prince Milos shall rule in the name of the Obrenovic’s. 
Though, should Prince Milan’s daughters have no male descendants, the Serbian people shall elect for their ruler that Serbian whom they trust the most. Yet, no family member or descendant of the Karadjordjevic’s can ever be elected Prince of Serbia, since this family has been anathematized.
The elected Prince shall announce his ascension to the throne to the people by a proclamation, and accept the power immediately. 
If at the time of Prince’s death there is no male descendant, but the Princess is enceinte, the Council of Ministers shall exercise the Prince’s authority, until the time of the birth. 
In this case, the Council of Ministers shall announce the Queen’s state to the people by a proclamation.
Article 11. The Prince must be of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith.
The Prince is of age when he attains eighteen years.
The Prince takes the following oath before the Assembly:
“I (name), ascending to the throne of the Principality of Serbia, and taking over the Prince’s power, swear by the Almighty God, that I will watch over the independence and integrity of the Principality; that I will uphold the Constitution, and keep it intact; that I will rule in accordance with the Constitution and laws; and that in all my acts and aims, I shall have in view the people’s welfare. So help me God! Amen!”
Article 12. In case the Prince is a minor, or in case of death of the heir to the throne, the Council of Ministers shall reign temporarily until the next session of the Grand National Assembly.
While reigning, the Council of Ministers cannot replace ministers, nor members of the Council.
Article 13. In case the Grand National Assembly has been convoked due to death of the Prince, without an heir to the throne, then it shall elect the Prince in accordance with Article 10 of this Constitution; if the Grand National Assembly has been convoked in case the heir to the throne is a minor, then it shall elect three regents. The regents shall be elected among the current or former: ministers, members of the State Council, and judges of courts of higher instance.
Article 14. The regents shall take an oath before the Assembly to be loyal to the Prince, and to rule according to the Constitution and the earthly laws. Then, the regents shall announce the same to the people by proclamation.
Article 15. While reigning, the members of the Council of Ministers shall receive no compensation, other than their regular salary. The regents shall split one fifth of the Prince’s Civil List on equal parts, while the rest belongs to the Prince. 
Article 16. In case of death of one of the regents, the other two regents shall appoint the third regent, in agreement with the State Council, no later than a month since regent’s death. In the meanwhile, the two regents shall reign effectively.
In case a regent’s state of health does not longer permit him to perform his functions, in the opinion of three physicians appointed by the State Council, the other two regents shall reign effectively on their own, for the duration of his illness.
Should one of the regents leave the country temporarily, the other two regents can rule effectively in his absence. However, the regent leaving the country temporarily shall leave the other two regents a written declaration, accepting everything they will do in his absence, as long as it is within the limits of their constitutionally prescribed authority.
In each of these cases, the reason why only two regents will be reigning shall be made public immediately.
Article 17. Should the regency in case of the minority of the heir to the throne last over five years, then the Assembly shall elect the regents for a three-year long period; should it be shorter than five years, then the original set of regents shall reign the entire time.
Article 18. The regency ends the moment the heir to the throne becomes of age, which shall be announced to the people by proclamation immediately.
Article 19. The heir to the Serbian throne shall be of the Eastern Orthodox Christian faith.
Article 20. The heir to the throne and other male children of the Prince cannot get married without Prince’s approval.
Article 21. Three mentors, appointed by the regents, in agreement with the mother of the heir to the throne and the State Council, shall supervise the heir’s education.
The regents cannot be appointed mentors.
II. Citizenship Rights
Article 22. Acquisition and loss of Serbian citizenship, and the rights attached to it, are regulated under this Constitution and the law. 
Article 23. All Serbs are equal before the law.
Article 24. All Serbs have equal access to public service jobs, if they fulfill the requirements prescribed by the law. 
Foreigners can join public service only as contracted officials, as prescribed by the law.
Article 25. Personal liberty and property are protected under the present Constitution and are not subject to any restrictions other than those provided for by law. 
Article 26. No one can be sentenced, until they have been authoritatively heard, or summoned to defend themselves, according to the law. 
Article 27. No one can be imprisoned, except in cases provided for by the law, and in forms prescribed by it.
Article 28. The home is inviolable. The home of a citizen cannot be entered, nor searched, against the citizen’s will, except in cases provided for by the law, and in forms prescribed by it. 
Article 29. The penalty of confiscation of property is forbidden. 
However, objects arising from a fraudulent source, or objects having served, or destined to serve in the accomplishment of a crime can be confiscated. 
Article 30. No one can be constrained to yield their goods to the State, or for any public needs, or undergo any restriction in their favor, except in cases provided for by the law, and in consideration of a legal indemnity. 
Article 31. Eastern Orthodox Christianity is the official religion of Serbia. All other acknowledged religions are placed under the protection of the law.
However, no one can take advantage of religious precepts, with a view to avoid fulfillment of their civil duties.
All acts that could infringe upon the Eastern Orthodox faith (such as proselytism) are forbidden. 
Article 32. Every Serb has the right to express themselves freely, while conforming to the prescriptions of the law. 
The press shall be regulated under a special law. 
Article 33. Every Serb has the right to file a complaint against illegal actions of the authorities. 
Should a superior authority reject the complaint as being ill-founded, the authority shall, in communicating its decision to the complainant, indicated the reasons therefore. 
Article 34. Every Serb has the right of petition, which can be signed by one or more citizens. Only offices and legal entities have the right of collective petition, and only regarding matters they are in charge of.
Article 35. Every Serb is required to serve in the army, except for those exempt by the law.
The institution of army can be neither abolished, nor cut down.
Article 36. Soldiers cannot assemble on their own; they can only be summoned by the authorities. 
Article 37. Soldiers are tried by court-martials for criminal matters only.
Articles 27, 28, and 32 of this Constitution apply to soldiers, only as far as they conform to the military law and disciplinary procedures.
Regulations related to military discipline shall be announced by the Prince by a proclamation. 
Article 38. In case of a danger to the public security, the government can temporarily abolish Articles 27, 28, 32, and 111 of this Constitution. 
Article 39. Every Serb is required to pay taxes to the State.
Only the Prince and the heir to the throne are exempt from paying taxes.
Article 40. Every Serb has the right to renounce their citizenship, after they have fulfilled their obligations to the government and other individuals. 
III. National Representation 
Article 41. The National Assembly is a body of national representation. 
Article 42. The National Assembly consists of representatives, freely elected by the people; and representatives, appointed by the Prince. 
The National Assembly can be Regular or Grand.  
Article 43. Representatives to the National Assembly are elected directly and indirectly. 
Article 44. All districts and municipalities elect their representatives, one representative per three thousand tax payers.  
Should a district or a municipality have less than three thousand tax payers, they elect one representative nonetheless.
The municipality of Belgrade elects two representatives.
Should a district or a municipality have over three thousand tax payers, and should that surplus surpass five hundred tax payers, they shall elect an additional representative; should the surplus be less than five hundred tax payers, they shall not elect an additional representative.
Article 45. Per every tree elected representatives, the Prince appoints one of his men, excelling at science, or public affairs, though the number of appointed representatives need not be complete.
Article 46. Every Serb of age and paying taxes to the State has the right to vote.
Article 47. Whoever has the right to vote can be elected elector; however, only those over thirty-five years of age, who pay the State a minimum of six thalers a year, and fulfill other conditions outlined in the election law can be elected representatives. 
Article 48. Public officials, retirees and others who receive any kind of support from the state budget, and attorneys cannot be elected representatives; but can be appointed representatives by the Prince.
However, professional soldiers can neither vote, nor be elected representatives. 
Article 49. A vote can be cast only once, in person, at one location.
Article 50. All representatives must live in Serbia, though not necessarily in the district or municipality where they are elected. 
Article 51. Representatives represent the whole of people, and not only those who voted for them; thus they cannot receive binding instructions from the voters, but present and resolve people’s needs based on their own views and conscience. 
Article 52. All representatives take the following oath: “I [name] swear, by the one and only God, to observe faithfully the Constitution, and to have, in the accomplishment of my mission as a representative, constantly in view the common good of the Prince and of the nation. May God be to me help in this world and in the other.”
Article 53. The National Assembly has a president and a vice-president. 
The Grand National Assembly elects among its members a president and a vice-president; per every session, the Regular National Assembly elects, also among its members, six individuals, out of whom the Prince appoints one president, and another one vice-president. 
The Assemblies elect the necessary number of secretaries among their members. 
A parliamentary election bill shall be brought before the Assembly at its first session.
Powers of the National Assembly
Article 54. The legislative power is vested in the National Assembly, together with the Prince. 
The National Assembly cannot deliberate on any questions, other than those assigned to it by the Constitution, or the Prince.
Article 55. No law can be promulgated, repealed, amended, or interpreted without the approval of the National Assembly.
Orders for the execution of laws, and to Prince’s supervisory and administrative authorities, are issued by the agents of legislative power.  
When promulgating a law, it shall be pointed out that the law has been adopted by the National Assembly; an order for the execution of law shall reference the law, based on which the order has been issued. 
Article 56. Only in case the country is in a grave danger, the Prince can, at the suggestion of the Council of Ministers, promulgate a law without the approval of the National Assembly. The law shall be brought before the National Assembly at the next session for approval.
However, laws regarding taxation can be neither instituted, nor changed, without the approval of the National Assembly.
Article 57. Laws and orders, promulgated by the Prince, in accordance with Articles 55 and 56, are binding for all citizens and government bodies. The National Assembly itself can deliberate as to whether it took part in promulgating a law, and whether this has been done according to the Constitution.
Article 58. Both the Prince and the National Assembly can propose an amendment to a law. However, only the Prince can propose a formal project.
Article 59. The National Assembly is required to deliberate first on the matters brought before it by the government, most importantly the budget, which can be put at the top of the National Assembly’s agenda at any time. Likewise, the government shall deliberate on the matters brought before it by the National Assembly marked “urgent” as soon as possible.  
Article 60. The government can revoke an amendment at any time before the National Assembly renders its final decision on the amendment. 
Article 61. Should the National Assembly take into consideration a project with additions and amendments, which have not been adopted by the government, the government can revoke the project completely, or re-submit it to the National Assembly in its original state, or including different amendments.
In any case, the government can request for its proposal to be fully adopted or rejected.
Article 62. Should the National Assembly reject a bill, the government can bring the same bill before the next National Assembly; whereas only an amended bill can be re-submitted to the same Assembly.
Article 63. Once set, a budget proposal is brought before the Prince. 
Should the National Assembly find that changes shall be made to the proposed budget, it shall form an opinion as to how the changes can be made without doing damage to the state treasury.
Article 64. The National Assembly cannot condition passing of the budget with unrelated matters.
Article 65. The government shall always examine and assess laws submitted to it by the National Assembly according to Article 63, and determine to what extent they can be adopted without doing damage to the state treasury.
Should the government be unable to adopt the proposed budget, and approve the requested amounts, even with additional explanations from the National Assembly; or should the National Assembly get dismissed before the budget is adopted, then the current year’s budget shall be used for the following year too, excluding expenses, which have already been paid. 
In this case, the Prince shall issue an order that the current budget shall be used for the following year too, countersigned by all ministers, and referencing this article.
Article 66. The State cannot take a loan without the approval of the Assembly. 
Should it become necessary for the State to take a loan under extraordinary circumstances, when the Assembly is not in session, the Assembly shall be convoked for an extraordinary session.
However, should the country be under such circumstances when it is not possible to convoke the Assembly, the Prince can, at the suggestion of the Council of Ministers, and in agreement with the State Council, take a loan, which cannot surpass two hundred thousand ducats.
Likewise, under extraordinary circumstances, the Prince can render a decision on an expense from the national treasury, without the approval of the National Assembly, but the amount cannot surpass thirty thousand ducats per year.
In both cases, a report shall be presented to the Assembly at its next session regarding what has been done, and why.
Article 67. The Assembly can receive written complaints regarding matters, which have already been resolved by ministers; however, it cannot receive complainants in person. 
Article 68. The Prince shall render decisions regarding all conclusions of the Assembly brought before him, during the same session, if possible. 
Article 69. Ministers have access to the Assembly, which is required to hear them whenever they request so. 
The Prince can send other trustees to the Assembly to make requested clarifications, and then, the trustees have the same rights as ministers. 
However, neither ministers, nor trustees have the right to vote in the Assembly.
Article 70. The Assembly can request for ministers or certain trustees to be present at its session, in order to present requested reports, or explanations, and these requests shall be granted, whenever this is not found to be damaging to the state interests. 
Article 71. A representative cannot be held responsible for casting a vote. 
Only in case a representative’s statement contains an insult against the Prince, his family, trustees, the Assembly, or its individual members, the president has the right to adjourn the session for the day, and suggest, at the next session, for that representative to be temporarily excluded from the Assembly.
Should a representative commit a crime or an offense, they can be tried by regular courts, if so approved by the Assembly.
Article 72. Representatives can be neither incarcerated, nor taken to court five days before a session of the Assembly is opened, and for the duration of the session, except in accordance with the following two articles.
Article 73. When caught in flagrante delicto, a representative can be incarcerated, however this shall be communicated to the assembly immediately, and no other investigation can be made, until the Assembly decides as to whether the incarceration is justified or not.
Article 74. While the Assembly is in session, no authority can summon or incarcerate its members, until the Assembly decides that a procedure against them can begin, except in case when they are caught in flagrante delicto. 
Convoking the National Assembly
Article 75. The National Assembly is convoked regularly every year, but it can also be convoked for an extraordinary session, when required. 
Article 76. The Prince convokes the National Assembly, and opens and closes its sessions; he makes decisions as to when and where its sessions take place. 
He can open or close a session through a spokesperson. Should the National Assembly be convoked as per Article 12, then those who convoked it shall open the session.
Article 77. The Prince can adjourn a session of the National Assembly, though the recess cannot be longer than six months. 
Article 78. The Prince can dismiss the National Assembly, and call for new election. 
However, the election shall take place no longer than four months after the dismissal; and the National Assembly shall be convoked no later than six months after the dismissal.   
Article 79. Representatives cannot assemble, or remain assembled, after a session has been closed or adjourned, or the National Assembly has been dismissed, unless instructed to do so by the Prince. 
Article 80. Every government’s suggestion shall be examined by one or more committees, before it is submitted to the National Assembly for approval. 
Article 81. The government shall make whatever clarifications requested by the committees. 
However, the committees shall, before they submit their opinion to the National Assembly, listen and assess a government trustee’s opinion on their suggestions. 
Article 82. The National Assembly can hold a session only if at least three quarters of its members are present.
However, its conclusions are considered valid only if they have received support of a simple majority of representatives. 
Article 83. Voting in the national assembly is done in person, and publicly.
Article 84. Only ministers have the right of audience with the National Assembly.
Article 85. Sessions of the National Assembly are public, but they can also be made private, if so requested by the president or a minister, or a government trustee; or if any of them announce that the statement they are about to make shall be kept secret; or when so requested by three representatives, who would be accompanied by at least a quarter of the present representatives, after the audience leaves. 
Article 86. No one can enter a session of the National Assembly, nor the building where the session is held, carrying a weapon.
Article 87. Representatives, who do not reside in the location where a session is held, shall be refunded travel expenses, and paid a day’s wage from the state treasury, which shall be set by a law.
Article 88. Other internal regulations of the National Assembly shall be set by a special law. 
Grand National Assembly
Article 89. Representatives to the Grand National Assembly are elected by the people, and their number is quadruple the number of representatives to the Regular National Assembly. 
The Grand National Assembly is convoked:
1. To elect new Prince, in case of death of the reigning 
Prince, when there is no heir to the throne according to provisions of this Constitution; in this case, the Grand National Assembly shall also determine the Civil List of the new Prince; 
2. To elect trustees of the Prince, when so required by this Constitution;
3. To deliberate on amendments to the Constitution;
4. To discuss matters of supreme importance, or exchange of the state territory; and 
5. By the Prince to deliberate on any question of extraordinary importance for the country.
IV. State Council
Article 90. The State Council is hereby instituted, with the following duties:
1. To advise on questions brought before it by the government; 
2. To draft and examine legal and administrative projects, as per government’s request;
3. To consider and resolve complaints against ministerial orders in administrative matters at question;
4. To resolve conflicts between administrative authorities; 
5. To approve partial expenditures on general credits included in the budget for extraordinary needs, as well as detailed application of the credit granted for public works, insofar as these expenses exceed the sum of which the minister himself can legally dispose;
6. To approve exceptional cases of entry into Serbian citizenship;
7. To approve loans, as per Article 66 of this Constitution;
8. To render decisions on taxes relative to districts, counties and municipalities;
9. To approve sale or other kind of alienation of property belonging to districts, counties and municipalities;
10. To render decisions on the amounts that show to be uncollectible; 
11. To approve exceptional loans from the state treasury;
12. To approve agreements, found to be advantageous for the State;
13. To request the necessary reports and explanations regarding state accounts from the Court of Accounts; and 
14. To deliberate as to whether appropriation of real estate for general public needs is in accordance with the law. 
Article 91. Members of the State Council are appointed by the Prince. They belong in the category of public servants. Their number cannot decrease below eleven, nor increase over fifteen. Among them, the Prince appoints president and vice-president, who hold these positions, until the Prince replaces them.
Article 92. Members of the State Council must be over thirty-five years of age, must have completed ten years of public service, and own real estate in Serbia. 
Internal regulations of the State Council shall be set by a special law.
V. State Property, Prince’s Property and Civil List
Article 93. State property consists of all movable and real property, as well as all property rights, which the state obtains and holds as its own. 
The ways in which the state property can be alienated, pledged or encumbered in another way shall be prescribed by law.
Article 94. Minister of Finance is in charge of the state property.
Article 95. The domain of the State is distinct from the private domain of the Prince, of which he can dispose freely.
Article 96. Every year the National Assembly determines the amount, which is paid to the Prince from the state treasury, in monthly installments, as his Civil List. 
The Prince pays expenses for maintaining the property, which he enjoys free of charge, out of his Civil List. 
Article 97. Once set, the Civil List cannot be increased without the approval of the National Assembly, nor decreased without the approval of the Prince.
Article 98. After Prince’s death, his Civil List applies to the heir to the throne, until the next session of the National Assembly. 
VI. Public Service
Article 99. The Council of Ministers is at the head of public service, placed immediately under the authority of the Prince. 
The Council of Ministers consists of ministers, appointed for individual areas of expertise, and among them the Prince appoints president and vice-president of the Council. 
Ministers are appointed and dismissed by the Prince.
Article 100. Ministers are responsible to the Prince and the National Assembly for all acts done in the exercise of their functions. 
Every state act signed by the Prince, shall be countersigned by the competent minister.
Article 101. A Minister can be impeached for treason against the country or the sovereign; for violation of the Constitution; and for receiving bribe and doing damage to the State out of self-interest. 
Article 102. A Minister can be impeached by the National Assembly. A proposal to impeach a minister shall be made in writing, contain the charges, and be signed by a minimum of twenty representatives. 
Article 103. Impeachment can be pronounced if at least two-thirds of the representatives present vote in favor of this. 
Article 104. An impeached minister shall be tried by the State Court, the membership of which shall be set by law. 
The Prince cannot pardon an impeached minister without the approval of the National Assembly.
Closer regulations regarding ministerial responsibility shall be set by law.
Article 105. Every public servant is responsible for acts committed in the exercise of their functions.
However, a judge cannot be taken to court, without the approval of the Court of Cassation. Only then can they be tried by a court of first instance. 
Article 106. Public servants take an oath of to be loyal to the Prince, and to perform their duties according to the Constitution. 
Soldiers do not take an oath to observe the Constitution.
Article 107. A public servant, who can no longer perform their duties, due to old age or other mental or physical obstacles, has the right to a pension. 
Other rights and duties of public servants shall be set by a special law.
VII. Courts
Article 108. Justice is rendered by first instance and higher instance courts.
Article 109. Justice is rendered in the name of the Prince. In rendering justice, courts are independent, and stand under no authority other than law itself.  
Article 110. No government body, legislative or administrative, can perform the work of courts; nor can courts perform legislative or administrative tasks. 
Public servants cannot be taken to court, without the approval of their superiors.
Article 111. No one can be tried by an incompetent court.
Article 112. Judges, who are consanguineous, cannot preside over the same court at the same time. This also applies to cross-cousins, up to the fourth degree; and in-laws, up to the second degree.
Article 113. Judges of courts of first instance shall be over twenty-five years of age; and judges of courts of higher instance shall be over thirty years of age. 
Article 114. Justice is rendered by a panel of three judges.
However, it can be set by law that a single judge renders justice for civil and criminal cases of lesser importance. 
Article 115. Hearings are public, except for those cases, from which the public shall be excluded, for the purpose of protecting the public order and morals; judges confer and vote in private, whereas judgment is pronounced aloud, publicly. 
Every ruling and order must include a list of reasons and law provisions they are based on.
Article 116. Defendant must have an attorney, for all crimes and offenses; and in cases prescribed by law, he must be assigned one by court. 
Article 117. Jury service shall be instituted for cases involving banditry, armed robbery, or arson. 
Article 118. The Prince has the right to grant amnesty for criminal offenses; he can lighten, reduce, or pardon a sentence. 
VIII. Church, School and Benevolent Institutions
Article 119. All religions acknowledged by law have the right to perform rituals in public. 
Article 120. All religions acknowledged by law are placed under the protection of the Prince.
Authorities of all religions are placed under the authority of the Ministry of Religion. 
Internal regulations of all religious organizations are set by their respective authorities. 
Article 121. Correspondence between authorities of the Eastern Orthodox Church and religious authorities and synods abroad has the approval of the Ministry of Religion. Correspondence between other religious authorities in Serbia and religious authorities abroad shall be submitted to the Ministry of Religion for approval. 
No ordinance originating from religious authorities abroad can be made public, nor executed without the knowledge and approval of the Ministry of Religion.
Article 122. Complaints against abuse of religious authority by any religion in the country are brought before the Minister of Religion. 
Article 123. Religious figures and institutions are, in terms of civil relations and property, subject to earthly laws.
Article 124. All public and private schools, and other educational institutions are placed under the authority of the State. 
Article 125. Property of benevolent institutions cannot be appropriated by the State, or in any way diverted from the destination, which has been assigned them by their founders. 
Only if it becomes impossible to use the property in the assigned way, the property can be used for other, similar causes, with the approval of those individuals, who are in charge of it.  
IX. Municipalities and Public Entities
Article 126. No municipality, or a public entity in general, can be instituted without the approval of the State government. Likewise, no existing municipality’s borders can be changed without the approval of the State government. 
Article 127. Municipalities are self-governed, in terms of internal affairs. 
Article 128. Every citizen and all real estate must belong to a municipality, and must be subject to that municipality’s tax regulations. 
Article 129.  Municipalities, and public entities in general can own property. 
Article 130. In addition to regulating internal affairs, municipal authorities shall also deal with matters assigned to them by state authorities, in accordance with law. 
X. General Provisions
Article 131. Amendments to the Constitution can be initiated by the Prince or the National Assembly.
Amending the Constitution requires a two-third support of representatives present in two consecutive session of the National Assembly.
Afterwards, the Grand National Assembly shall be convoked to render the final decision as to the amendment. This decision of the Grand National Assembly becomes valid when confirmed by the Prince.
Conclusion
Article 132. This Constitution goes into effect when signed by Prince’s trustees. It shall replace the following laws: the October 20, 1859 law on succession of the Serbian throne, and the August 17, 1861 amendment to this law; August 17, 1861 law on the establishment of the State Council; and any other provisions, of whatever law, which are contrary to provisions of this Constitution.
The following laws remain in effect: the October 30, 1856 law No. 1660; and the November 4, 1861 law No. 2244.
Interim Orders
Article 133. The first session of the National Assembly in accordance with this Constitution shall be held in 1870, and representatives to that Assembly shall be elected by the current election law, unless it has been revoked by this Constitution.  
However, the government is authorized to draft a budget for 1870, in agreement with the State Council.
President of the National Assembly
Z. KARABIBEROVIC
Vice-president
T. P. TUCAKOVIC
Secretaries
KOSTA GRUDIC
JOV. BOSKOVIC	
ON BEHALF OF THE ALEKSINACKI DISTRICT
Radojko Pesic
Dina Stefanovic
Radisav Milic
Stefan Miletic
Radivoje Stanojevic
Zivko S. Bracinac
Milos Zivic	
Milosav Aleksic
Mihajlo Zivadinovic
Nedeljko Zivadinovic
Nedeljko Stevanovic
Miladin P. Martinovic
Stojan Jankovic
Marko Milovanovic	
Milenko Petrovic
Stanisav Pavlovic
Mileta Stambolic
Trifun Trifunac
Marko K. Milojkovic
V. K. Stosic 